===== PAGE 1 =====
1 mashakariziki@gmail.com STATE UNIVERSITY OF CAMPINAS (UNICAMP) INSTITUTE OF ECONOMICS MASTERS IN ECONOMICS DEVELOPMENT (Social Economy and Labour) THE HISTORICAL INFORMATION OF TANZANIA (From Colonialism to Political independence) By Riziki Mashaka A survey paper published on August 2018


===== PAGE 2 =====
2 ABSTRACT The study shows history of Tanzania from colonial period to independence, and it reveals how Africans were exploited and oppressed by capitalist countries. The capitalist countries including Britain, Germany, France and others invaded African continent long time ago in order to obtain capitalist demands which were required in Europe during the development of capitalism, such as Area for investment, market, cheap labour, raw materials and others. Therefore, in the mid of 19th C, the colonialists started to penetrate in the interior of Africa to search for capitalist demands. The writer also reveals how Africans people reacted against the colonial rule but many resistances failed due to several reasons like poor weapons, disunity, poor tactics and others, likewise, the resistance brought negative consequences to African societies like death of people, decline of production, family separation, famine and others more, on other hand, the resistances planted the idea of nationalism which later helped people to fight for their own independence. Moreover, the study explains about hostility which existed among the capitalist countries and how it led to WW1 and WW2 in Europe, It also shows how Tanganyika was given to Britain after the end of WW1 and it reveals the negative impacts of world wars to European powers. However, the writer describes about political movements done by the people of Tanganyika and Zanzibar during the struggle for independence, Tanganyika African National Union (TANU) under the leadership of Mwalimu J.K Nyerere led to independence of Tanganyika in 1961 while Afro Shirazi Party (ASP) under Abeid Karume brought the independence of Zanzibar in 1963. The union between Tanganyika and Zanzibar led to United Republic of Tanzania in April 1964. Furthermore, the study revealed the socio-economic and political situation of Tanzania after independence, for example, the birth of political ideologies like Socialism and others. The national independence led to the end of colonial rule in Tanzania and it brought freedom to all people of Tanganyika and Zanzibar. Likewise, Tanzania experienced three political phases after independence, the first phase was in 1961-67, (the short period of Independence), the second was in 1967-80 (the period of Socialism- Ujamaa) and the third was in 1980s to onwards (the period of globalization). Tanzania also faced economic crisis in 1970 but the situation changed in 1990s where the country started to improve its socio-economic and political development due to various factors like the improvement of health system, education, reduction of poverty and others. Therefore, this paper describes the historical information of Tanzania and how it impacts the development country in all aspects of life like socially, politically and economically. Currently, the macroeconomics features indicates that, Tanzania is growing up fast and much efforts are implemented to increase country’s development.


===== PAGE 3 =====
3 INTRODUCTION The name Tanzania came after the union between Tanganyika and Zanzibar in 1964. Tanganyika became independent in 1961, while Zanzibar attained its independence in 1963. Both parties gained their independence from British colonial rule. Many colonialists started to penetrate to the interior of Tanganyika in the mid of 19thC whereby the agent of colonialism like Missionaries, Traders and Explorers came to find the capitalist demands such as raw material, cheap labour, markets, investments and others which were needed by the colonialists. In 1948 the Germany missionary Johannes Rebmann became the first European to see the Mount Kilimanjaro; British explorers like Richard Burton and John Speke crossed the interior to Lake Tanganyika in June 1857, In January 1866, the Scottish explorer and missionary David Livingstone, who crusaded against the slave trade, went to Zanzibar, from where he sought the source of the Nile, and established his last mission at Ujiji on the shores of Lake Tanganyika, however, there were colonial agents who penetrated in interior of Tanganyika to find information so as access all demands which were interested at that time. However, Germany colonial interests were first advanced in 1884, whereby Karl Peters formed a society for German colonization as he also signed different treaties with tribal chiefs to access some territories, in 1885, Prince Otto von Bismarck's government granted imperial protection to German East Africa Company established by Peters with Bismarck's encouragement. In 1885, the Berlin conference was held to make the partition of colonies as European powers successfully obtained colonies from Africa such as British, Germany and France. GERMANY RULE IN TANGANYIKA The Germany colonialists in Tanganyika were very oppressive as they continued brutally to exercise their authority with disregard and contempt for existing local structures and traditions, there were different oppressive actions done to native Africans such as land alienation, forced labour, racism and others which planted the idea of resistance from the Africans, for example, between 1891 and 1894, Hehe led by Chief Mkwawa resisted German expansion but were eventually defeated. After a period of guerrilla warfare, Mkwawa was cornered and committed suicide in 1898. Many people from Tanganyika resisted against German colonial rule because it was exploitative and oppressive by nature, for example, Maji Maji resistance of 1905 – 1907, which temporarily united a number of southern tribes ended only after an estimated 120,000 Africans died from fighting or starvation. Research has shown that traditional hostilities played a large part in the resistance.


===== PAGE 4 =====
4 GERMAN COLONIAL IMPERIAL PROTECTION FORCES – TANGANYIKA 1898 Source: Tanganyika history Magazine (1998) Capitalists invaded Africa because of the capitalist interests which caused by development of competitive and monopoly capitalism in Europe. During competitive capitalism, many capitalist powers undergone industrial revolution especially Britain, which was the first country to be industrialized in 19thC, the development of competitive capitalist led to the requirements of capitalist demands such as raw materials, cheap labour, and area for investment, area for markers of capitalist exported goods and others hence capitalist powers decided to colonize Africa in order to acquire some potential areas for capitalist interests. However the competitive capitalism led to the great depression of 1873 – 1896 which had many impacts to capitalists like transition to monopoly capitalism, decline of agriculture, rising competition and decline in profitability, ended a long era of economic linearization, protective tariffs became the permanent part of the international economic order and others. However monopoly capitalism led to secondary industrial revolution in the end of 19thC which increase the interest of capitalist demands. During monopoly capitalism the capitalist powers experienced high technological level especially industrial technology, centralization of capital and finance, higher financial and technological requirements to promote industrialization and other many. Moreover capitalists experienced imperialism which also led to increased level of industrial technology so the capitalists still needed some industrial demands in order to satisfy their needs as a result they came in Africa and started to obtain colonies for the interest of their own profit.


===== PAGE 5 =====
5 WHY TANGANYIKA RESISTANCES FAILED i. Poor weapons, such as Arrows, Knives, and others while colonialists used guns and other advanced weapons. ii. Disunity, the Africans were disunited during the wars as some African also collaborated with Germany to fight against their fellow Africans. iii. Poor believes, many Africans faced the problem of poor believes, for Example, Chief Kinjikitile Ngwale told people that bullet will turn to water but he later failed and finally many people were killed. iv. Poor tactics of fighting, many resistances did not applied good tactics of fighting hence many resistance failed. MAJI MAJI RESISTANCE 1905-1907 Source: Tanganyika history magazine (1998)


===== PAGE 6 =====
6 DEATH OF AFRICAN CHIEFS Source: majimajiwars.com/Tanzaniahistory CHIEF MKWAWA OF HEHE Source: Tanganyika history magazine (1998)


===== PAGE 7 =====
7 IMPACT OF RESISTANCES TO THE PEOPLE OF TANGANYIKA • Death of many Africans • Africans resistances were failed for example Hehe resistance • Increase of oppression and exploitation to Africans. • Decrease of production activities in Africans societies. • Family separation • Famine THE RISE OF HOSTILITIES AND WORLD WAR 1 Many capitalists power were interested in potential areas in Tanganyika due to availability of plenty fertile lands, Minerals, Lakes and others potential demands hence it resulted hostilities among the capitalist powers due to the territory interventions and misunderstanding among themselves because of power control over the colonies. Before the occurrence of World War 1, Germany had been prepared to resist any attack that could be made without extensive preparation, for example, for the first year of hostilities, the Germans were strong enough to conduct offensive operations in their neighbors’ territories by repeatedly attacking British East Africa. Germany started the hostilities in 1914 by unsuccessfully attacking from the town of Tanga, British then attacked the town in November 1914 but were thwarted by General Paul Von Lettow-Vorbeck's forces at the Battle of Tanga, and the British Royal Navy occupied Mafia Island in January 1915. After failing in different attacks Germany started to organize military forces so as to make revenges with British over territories control. In 1916 Germany force was totally defeated by British, In October 1961 General Smuth wrote "With the exception of the Mahenge Plateau (the Germans) have lost every healthy or valuable part of their Colony". Cut off from Germany, General Von Lettow by necessity conducted a guerilla campaign throughout 1917. Living off the land and dispersing over a wide area, German forces evacuated the colony by crossing the Ruvuma River into Portuguese Mozambique. However many Germany troops were killed for example about 5,482 troops were killed while other many captured during the last six month of 1917, In November 1918 his remaining force surrendered near present-day Mbala Zambia consisting of 155 Europeans, 1,165 Askaris, 2,294 African porters etc., and 819 African women. Under the Versailles treaty all Germany was ordered to return all overseas possession including Germany East Africa. During this period the Germany administrative system was collapsed such as


===== PAGE 8 =====
8 education system, political issues and others hence Tanganyika was given to British colonial control. GERMAN SOLDIERS DURING WW1 Source: WW2Article/Tanzania, 1990s AFRICAN SOLDIERS DURING WW1 IN TANGANYIKA Source: WW2Article/Tanzania, 1990s


===== PAGE 9 =====
9 When the capitalist hostilities became strong in Africa especially in 1914 the situation was very bad to capitalist countries because it was an interwar period in which the First World War 1 took place and many capitalist power involved in the war such as Germany, France, United State, British, Austria Hungary, Italy and others due to the capitalist interest and other colonial matters. An interwar period in Europe began in 1914 up to 1945 where the capitalist powers undergo different historical situation such as decline of liberal order, World War 1, the great depression, European reconstruction, the rise of US as big capitalist power, serious economic crises and great depression of 1933 – 1945, the recovery policies and later 1945 the world war 2 occurred. The recovery policies were introduced by the capitalist powers after the great depression for example American New Deal but all in all were to promote the recovery economic situation for their own interest. The World War 1 led to great depression in 1933 – 1945 and during this time the economic situation of many capitalist powers dropped down for example decreased of production, bad distribution of income, financial problems like bad banking structures, the rise of dictatorship ideology such as Fascism in German under Adolf Hitler and Nazism in Italy under Benito Mussolini. Germany lost in the war as this contributed to the rise of dictatorship ideologies which later resulted the Second World War. An interwar period had much impacts to the African societies especially Tanganyika because the hostility situation became stronger among the capitalist powers fought the historical war which had great impact to world economies as a results were suffered a lot after the war for example some Africans X soldiers were taken to help some capitalist powers during the war but many them were died while production activities in Africa turned down because all man powers were taken to the war. Germany was punished during the Versailles peace treaty and all Germany colonies were given to other capitalist powers for example Tanganyika was given to British. However the serious economic great depression which happened in Europe led to the increase of oppression and exploitation in many African countries because many capitalist powers experienced economic crisis therefore many countries like British and US implemented strong policies to recovery the economic situation for example British under Sir Donald Cameroon introduced indirect rule in Tanganyika. BRITISH ADMISTRATION AFTER WORLD WAR 1 Governor Byatt took measures to revive African institutions by encouraging limited local rule. He authorized the formation in 1922 of political clubs such as the Tanganyika Territory African Civil Service Association, which in 1929 became the Tanganyika African Association and later constituted the core of the nationalist movement. Under the Native Authority Ordinances of 1923,


===== PAGE 10 =====
10 Sir Donald Cameron became the governor of Tanganyika in 1925, he introduced indirect rule with traditional indigenous Africans. In 1926, the Legislative Council was established with seven unofficial (including two Indians) and thirteen official members, Julius Nyerere became one of the unofficial members in 1954. The council was again reconstituted in 1955 with 44 unofficial members (10 Europeans, 10 Africans, 10 Indians, and 14 government representatives) and 17 official members. Railway development, In 1928, the Tabora to Mwanza railway line was opened to traffic. The line from Moshi to Arusha opened in 1930. In 1931 a census established the population of Tanganyika, at 5,022,640 natives, in addition to 32,398 Asians and 8,228 Europeans. Health and education initiatives, Under British rule, efforts were undertaken to fight the Tsetse fly (a carrier of sleeping sickness), and to fight malaria and bilharziasis; more hospitals were built. SIR, DONALD CAMEROON OF BRITAIN Source: Tanganyika History Magazine (1998)


===== PAGE 11 =====
11 TANGANYIKA SITUATION DURING WORLD WAR 2 Two days after Nazi Germany invaded Poland, the United Kingdom declared war and the British forces in Tanganyika were ordered to intern the German males living in Tanganyika. The British government feared that these Axis country citizens would attempt to help the Axis forces and some of the Germans living in Dar es Salam did attempt to flee the country but were stopped and later interned by Roald Dahl and a small group of Tanganyika soldiers of the King's African Rifles. During the war about 100,000 people from Tanganyika joined the Allied forces and were part of the 375,000 British colonial troops who fought against the Axis forces. Tanganyika fought in units of the King’s African Rifles and fought in the East African Campaign in Somalia and Abyssinia against the Italians, in Madagascar against the Vichy French during the Madagascar Campaign, and in Burma against the Japanese during the Burma Campaign Tanganyika became an important source of food and Tanganyika’s export income greatly increased from the pre-war years of the Great Depression however despite the additional income the war caused inflation within the country. SITUATION IN EUROPE AFTER WORLD WAR 2 AND GOLDEN AGE The World War 2 began in 1939 – 1945 and capitalists’ powers which involved in the war were Germany, British, United States, U.S.S.R, Italy, France and others. The Second World War had great impacts to African colonies due to the fact that many African soldiers died during the war, the economic production was dropped in Africa, families separations, after some soldiers being taken to the war, famine due to decline of production, intensification of exploitation and others, therefore the war had great impacts in African societies. German had finally defeated in the Second World War and the failure of German led to the rise of many capitalist powers like United States, Soviet Union, France, British and other many, US and Soviet Union became the major winners, Europe in need of reconstructions, devastating Japan after the atomic bombs in Hiroshima and Nagasaki. However capitalist powers passed in an era of polarization, Bretton wood regimes and the new international order (Keynes and white plans), as well international arrangements However the golden age started in 1945 – 1973 among the capitalist powers. It was a post war periods where many capitalist powers experienced high living standard and better economic situation like economic growth, full employment, currency stability, high productivity high industrialization, high living standard to the people and other many.


===== PAGE 12 =====
12 However, Second World War 2 planted the idea of nationalism in Africa which later led to decolonization Africa, for example some soldiers who went to fight during WW2 returned with new tactics of liberation, but some liberals movements were established in African to fight against the colonial dominations for example, a lot of church movements were introduced in order to fight for the independence, for example, Martin Kayamba form Tanganyika initiated a church movement to fight against colonial rule. TRANSITION TO INDEPENDENCE After Tanganyika became a UN trust territory, the British felt extra pressure for political progress, The British principal of "gradualism" was increasingly threatened and was abandoned entirely during the last few years before independence, Five UN missions visited Tanganyika, the UN received several hundred written petitions, and a handful of oral presentations made it to the debating chambers in New York City between 1948 and 1960. The Africans attended public gatherings in Tanganyika with UN representatives; there were peasants, urban workers, government employees, and local chiefs and nobles who personally approached the UN about local matters needing immediate action. And finally, there were Africans at the core of the political process that had the power to mould the future. Their goal was political advancement for Africans, with many supporting the nationalist movement, which had its roots in the African Association (AA). It was formed in 1929 as a social organization for African government servants in Dar es Salaam and Zanzibar. The AA was renamed the Tanganyika African Association (TAA) in 1948 and ceased being concerned with events in Zanzibar. In the beginning of 1954, African nationalism centered on the Tanganyika African National Union (TANU), which was a political organization formed by Julius Nyerere in that year as the successor to the TAA. The TANU won the Legislative Council elections in 1958, 1959, and 1960, with Nyerere becoming chief minister after the 1960 election. Internal self-government started on 1 May 1961 followed by independence on 9 December 196.


===== PAGE 13 =====
13 TANGANYIKA INDEPENDE IN 1961 Source: IndependenceofTanzania.net/Independencearticles/1961 THE FIRST PRESIDENT OF TANGANYIKA, MWALIMU JULIUS K. NYERERE Source: IndependenceofTanzania.net/Independencearticles/1961


===== PAGE 14 =====
14 MWALIMU NYERERE AND NELSON MANDELA IN THE PICTURE Source: IndependenceofTanzania.net/Independencearticles/1961 ZANZIBAR Zanzibar is the name of an Island also known as Unguja and the neighbor island of Pemba; both islands were under Portuguese domination in 16th and 17th Centuries but were taken by Oman Arabs in the early of 18th C. The height of Arab rule came during the reign of Sultan Seyyid Said, who moved his capital from Muscat to Zanzibar, established ruling Arab elite, and encouraged the development of clove plantations, using the island's slave labor. Zanzibar and Pemba were world-famous for their trade in spices and became known as the Spice Islands. The United Kingdom's early interest in Zanzibar was motivated by both commerce and the determination to end the slave trade. In 1822, the British signed the first of a series of treaties with Sultan Said to curb this trade, but not until 1876 was the sale of slaves finally prohibited. The Helgoland-Zanzibar Treaty of 1890 made. THE UNION OF TANGANYIKA AND ZANZIBAR Tanganyika attained its independence on 9 Dec 1961 under the political power of Tanganyika African National Union (TANU), On 9 December 9, 1962, a republican constitution was implemented with Mwalimu Julius Kambarage Nyerere as Tanganyika's first president. Zanzibar gained independence from the British on 10 December 1963, as a constitutional monarchy under its Sultan. On 12 January 1964, the African majority


===== PAGE 15 =====
15 revolted against the sultan and a new government was formed with the ASP leader, Abeid Karume, as President of Zanzibar and Chairman of the Revolutionary Council. In the first few days of what would come to be known as the Zanzibar Revolution. On 26 April 1964, Tanganyika united with Zanzibar to form the United Republic of Tanganyika and Zanzibar. The country was renamed the United Republic of Tanzania on 29 October of that year. The name Tanzania is a blend of Tanganyika and Zanzibar and previously had no significance. Under the terms of this union, the Zanzibar Government retains considerable local autonomy. MWALIMU JULIUS NYERERE DURING THE UNION DAY – 1964 Source: Uhurumagazine/Tanzania (2000) JULIUS NYERERE AND ABEID KARUME OF ZANZIBAR Source: Uhurumagazine/Tanzania (2000)


===== PAGE 16 =====
16 SITUATION OF TANZANIA FROM 1970s TO CURRENT After the long time exploitation and oppression from the colonial powers Tanzania now became independent and the government wanted to implement new policies in order to promote national development in all aspects of life such as socially, politically as well as economically. Therefore after the independence of 1961 Tanzania experienced three major economic development and change periods which facilitate the national development, the first period was in 1961 – 1967, the second was 1967 – mid 1980 and the last was the mid of 1980s – onwards (current) From 1961 – 1967 (The short period since Independence) During this period the country introduced a first five year plan whereby efforts were made to implement a programme which depended on foreign investment to support massive, capital-intensive industrialization and agricultural development projects. The government fostered the plan in order to strengthen the capitalist mode of production by encouraging the national development but capitalist’s imbalance situation increase exploitation and affect the national development goals as a result the government change the policy in 1967. Tanzania in 1967 to 1980 (The period of Arusha Declaration – Ujamaa) During this period the government of Tanzania adopted the policy of Socialism whereby president Nyerere introduced the Arusha declaration as the country believed in socialist way of ways, the period went together with the policy of Ujamaa (Family hood) during this people the government nationalized all means of productions like Plantations, Industries, Mines, and commerce, state become the major owner of the state owned enterprises, a period of nationalize private properties, this political decision swept away the capitalist mode of productions in Tanzania. That, the emergence of Arusha declaration led to the failure of first five year plan that was adopted by Tanzania after the Independence, the plan was not yielding the anticipated result like Rural-Urban development differentials increased, local expertise remained inadequate and land and labour resources were underutilized (Kaiser 1996:229) Ujamaa policy did not come up with positive outcomes, during this period private sector entrepreneurs were not treated in a good manner, during the period of Arusha Declaration per capita incomes grew by 0.7 per cent per year. This was led by the public administration sector with a sizeable contribution from agriculture and manufacturing. Exports stagnated due to the policy environment that was hostile for exports. Government had monopoly on marketing of goods and services. Inefficiencies drove down producer prices and there was high effective protection of the import-substituting industrial sector. Therefore the policy failed and affected the economic development of Tanzania in the long period since 1967 to 1980.


===== PAGE 17 =====
17 SOME EXTERNAL FACTORS AND ITS IMPACTS IN TANZANIA BEFORE THE GLOBALIZATION Tanzania fought a war with Uganda under the leadership of Idd Amin Dadah (Kagera war 1978 – 79) the war affected much the economic development of Tanzania, many people were died during fighting, decrease of production activities affected the economy, Among the economic infrastructure that were destructed in the 1978/79 war is the Kagera River bridge and sugar factory at Kyaka in Bukoba district. The literature on the impacts of war on economic development is abundant. Among these include Ades and Chua (1997) who found that regional instability and domestic political instability have strong negative effects on a country’s economic performance Another political factor was the supporters from donors’ community; Tanzania gained moral, material, technical, technological and financial support for its economic development mainly from socialist oriented countries like China, the then United Soviet Socialist Republic (USSR), Canada and Scandinavian countries of Norway, Sweden and Denmark, this was because during cold war Tanzania stood in Non alignment movement (NAM) so this help the country because she was not regarded as an enemy, this strengthened then national economy, during cold war (capitalist west and the socialist east) she did not aligned. Tanzania spent so long time in helping some fellow Africans countries in their liberation struggle such as South Africa and Mozambique, Tanzania believed that it would not be free until all countries were free, it also supported freedom fighters and refugees from these countries that were based in Tanzania, including South Africans at the then Mazimbu camp in Morogoro region. However, in 1977 up to 1985 Tanzania economy experienced internal and external shocks, the external shocks were fall of commodities prices in the world market, the oil crisis of 1983 drained 60% of export earnings, draught, collapse of East African Community and the demand for building new infrastructure, the war between Uganda and Tanzania while the internal shocks were huge government and party bureaucracy, miss management of public institution and corruption, therefore the situation in the country was not good. 1980s – Onwards (Current) Globalization has both positive and negative impacts in Tanzania development history whereby it positively led to the improvement of healthy services in the interior areas of the country (villages) such as use of technological medical devices in hospitals; it led to the improvement of agriculture services for example the effective use of KILIMO KWANZA policy to encourage farmers to improve agriculture activities, improvement of transport and communication for example the government built the road from Bukoba – Mwanza to Dar es Salaam also establishment of telecommunication companies, Trade liberalization,


===== PAGE 18 =====
18 improve of life standard of the people and other many while it negatively pave the way to neo colonialism after the economic globalization whereby the country undergo privatization of the public sectors and other neo liberal globalization features. Tanzania made another political change in 1980s due to the current global change (globalization) but also the internal and external economic shocks which happened since 1977 to 1985 therefore the government made the reform on the country policy, this period is commonly known as the reform era. However, the reforms are the opposite of the 1967 political decision to embrace socialism. In this period, Tanzania’s political decision is to embrace the capitalist, market-oriented and private sector- led economic development and change. The relatively free interplay of the market forces of supply and demand. The main reform which took place was the privatization of state owned enterprises (SOE), this led to the relaxation of entry restrictions in virtually all economic sectors; deregulation in various industries; abolition of price controls; independence of the central bank; elimination of import licensing; removal of foreign exchange, exchange rate- and interest rate controls; easing of controls over mergers and acquisitions (M&As); public sector service reform; and political reforms in form of allowing multiparty democracy. Therefore the government did not like to face the same challenges like those of Arusha declaration. Other Foreign Direct Investments benefits include direct and indirect and often better paying employment opportunities; reducing investment capital gap; introducing up to date and state of the art technologies; superior managerial, leadership and marketing skills; increasing government revenues through privatization proceeds, fees, concessions, dividends on profits, and taxes; supporting community social development projects; forward and backward linkages with the rest of the economy and generally increasing to the supply side of quantity and quality of goods and services in the economy, therefore in this epoch the government wanted to improve national development sectors by the means of privatization and others based on the nature of economic globalization. The government decision of the mid-1980s has potential negative impacts in the economic development and change in Tanzania such as introduction and practice of the concept of cost-sharing in key social services. The services include education, health and water. With 36% of the country’s population below the poverty line (URT: 2005), investments in human capital in form of education and health may be threatened. In the long run therefore, demand for adequate human resources needed for economic development and change may be short in supply. However, in this epoch of neo liberal globalization, Tanzania introduced structural adjustment program (devaluation, Deregulation and Deflation) devaluation of the currency by 400%, deregulation of trade and finance, privatization of public institutions, commitment to pay external debts. The impacts on neo globalization in Tanzania were increase of expense in health services, many parents failed to send their children to schools (about 34% people failed to do so), local businesses were not protected from overseas


===== PAGE 19 =====
19 import, there was a big gap between rich and poor, about 51% of Tanzanians lived in poverty, unemployment due to privatization of 333 public institutions out of 395 and retrenchment of government employees, farmers received low income due to lack of subsides. KARIBU TANZANIA (WELCOME TO TANZANIA)


===== PAGE 20 =====
20 REFFERENCES 1. KENNETH A. ROBERTSON, Educational development and pre independent Tanganyika, Vol 12, (Oxfords development records Projects, 1985. 2. JAMES L. GIBLIN, The Politics of Environmental Control in Northeastern Tanzania,1840-1940,University of Pennsylvania Press, 1992. 3. MATTHEW LOCKWOOD, Fertility and Household Labour in Tanzania: Demography, Economy, and Society in Rufiji District, C.1870-1986 Oxford University, 1998 4. Googlesearch/http.www.historyoftanzania.com.wikipedia. 5. GALBRAITH, J. K. The new industrial state. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2007. 6. Shonfield, A. Modern capitalism: the changing balance of public and private power. New York: Oxford University Press, 1965. 7. ABDUL SHERIFF J. Currey, Slaves, Spices, and Ivory in Zanzibar: Integration of an East African Commercial Empire into the World Economy, 1770-1873. 8. Gorz, A. Critique of economic reason. New York: Verso, 1989. 9. Tanzania social sector review, 1999 by the world bank, Washington Dc, A world bank country study, United States of America first printing, October 1999. 10. Mlaga, E. (1995). Crisis, Urbanization and Urban Poverty in Tanzania. A Study of Urban Poverty and Survival Politics, Lanham, University Press of America, USA.