===== PAGE 1 =====
THE REVOLUTIONARY GOVERNMENT OFZANZillAR THE CONSTITUTION OF ZANZIBAR Publication made possible by a grant from UNDP Printed and Bound by: College of Education Press P.OBOX1933 Tel: 25524 2239396 Fax: 255 24 2234102 Chukwani - Zanzibar


===== PAGE 2 =====
i . The Constitution of Zanzibar [R.E.2006) ----------------------~~--------------~-1 . Zanzibar. THE CONSTITUTION OF ZANZIBAR TABLE OF CONTENTS PREAMBLE CHAPTER ONE ZANZIBAR AND THE PEOPLE PART ONE ZANZIBAR 2. The Area of Zanzibar, regional and district boundaries. 3. Govenmlent seal. 4. The Constitution of Zanzibar. 5. Zanzibar to be a state of multiparty democracy. 5A. Distribution of powers. 6. A Zanzibari. 7. Right to vote. PART TWO THE PEOPLE CHAPTER TWO FUNDAMENTAL OBJECTIVES AND DIRECTIVE PRINCIPLES AND POLICIES OF THE REVOLUTIONARY GOVERNMENT OF ZANZIBAR 8. Fundamental objectives of the Government. 9. The Govenlinent and the People.


===== PAGE 3 =====
(R.E.200G] The Constitution of Zanzibar 10. (1) Political objectives. Economic objectives. Social objectives. (3) (5) (6) (7) lOA. 1l. 12. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20. 21. 22. 23. 24. 25. 25A. Health, educational and cultural objectives. Towards work objectives. Amendment of the provisions of Chapter Two. CHAPTER THREE PROTECTION OF FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS AND INDIVIDUAL FREEDOl\iS Equality of people. Equality before the law. Right to life. Right to individual freedom. Right to privacy and personal security. Protection of freedom of movement. Protection fyom deprivation of property. Freedom of expression. Right to freedom of religion. Protection of fieedom of assembly and association. Freedom to participate in public affairs, light to work, and receive remuneration. Duty to participate in work. Duty to abide by the laws of the land, duty to safeguard public property and Defence of the Nation. Limitations to the rights and freedoms and safeguard to the rights and obligation. Fundamental lights and individual freedoms. Institution of suit ii 26. 27. 28. 29. 30. 3l. 32. 33. 34. 35. 36. 37. 38. 39. 40. 41. The Constitution of Zanzibar CHAPTER FOUR THE EXECUTIVE PART ONE THE PRESIDENT [R.E. 2006] The Office of the President and qualifications for election of President. Election of President. Tenn of office of President. Extension offive years period. Disqualification of President. Oath ofthe President. Removal £l·om office of the President due to ill health. Vacancy in the office ofthe President. Election procedure where the office of the President is vacant. Salary and other allowances of President. President's Immunity from legal proceedings while in office. Impeachment by the House of Representatives. Status ofFomlCr President. PART TWO THE CIDEF MINISTER The Chief Minister of Zanzibar. Vacancy in the Office of Chief Minister. Resolution of vote ofno confidence. m


===== PAGE 4 =====
[R.E. 20061 The Constitution of Zanzibar 42. 43. 44. 45. 46. 47. 48. 49. 50. SI. 52. 53. 54. 55. 56. 56A. 57. 58. 59. 60. 61. 62. PART THREE MINISTERS, DEPUTY MINISTERS AND REVOLUTIONARY COUNCIL Ministries of Revolutionary Government of Zanzibar. The Revolutionary Council. Assignment of Ministers to Ministries. Meeting of the Council. Oath of allegiance. Deputy Ministers. Vacancy in offices of Minister , Member of the Revolutionary Council. Secretary to the Revolutionary Council. Principal Secretaries. PART FOUR GOVERNMENT AUTHOIDTY Obj ectives ofthe Government of Zanzibar. TIle President not bound to adhere to any advice. Establishment of offices and appointment of officers. Tenure of office in the service of the Revolutionary Government of Zanzibar. The Attorney - General. Functions of the Attorney-General. Director of Public Prosecutions. Oath of allegiance. Special advisers. Prerogative of mercy. Advisory Committee on prerogative of mercy. Regional and District Commissioner. Functions of Regional and District Commissioner. t IV The Constitution of Zanzibar [R.E. 2006] --------.--------------~----------.------CHAPTER FIVE THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES PART ONE COMPOSITION OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 63. Legislative Council. 64. Establishment ofthe House of Representatives. 65. Election of elected members. 66. Nominated members. 67. Women members of the House of Representatives. 68. Qualification for election. 69. Disqualification for election. 70. Oath of member of the House of Representatives. 71. Tenure of office by members of the House of Representatives. 72. Detennination of whether a person is a member of the House of Representatives or not. 73. The Speaker. 74. The Deputy Speaker. 75. Procedure for election of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker. 76. Clerk ofthe House of Representatives. 77. Office ofthe House of Representatives. PART TWO LEGISLATION AND PROCEDURE IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 78. Power to legislate. 79. Legislative procedure. 80. AmendmentoftheConstitution. v


===== PAGE 5 =====
[R.E. 200.6:.:c1'--_____ 1:.:'.:.:le....:C:::o:.:.:l1:.:st..::.::.it:.:ut::.::io:.:.:I1...::0=-.if.=Z.::.al1.:.:::z:.::.ib_a_r _______ _ 81. Presiding at sittings ofthe House of Representatives. 82. Vacant seats in the House of Representatives and procedure to conduct business of the House. 83. Voting in the House of Representatives. 84. Responsibility of the President in the House of Representatives. 85. Conmlittee$ of the House of Representatives. 86. The House to enact law. 87. Official language. 88. Functions of the House of Representatives. PART THREE SUl\1MONING AND DISSOLUTION OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 89. Summoning the session of the House of Representatives. 90. General elections and the first session. 91. Summoning and dissolution of the House of Representatives. 92. Life of the House of Representatives. CHAPTER SIX THE JUDICIARY PART ONE THE HIGHT COURT 93. Establishment of the High Court. 94. Appointment ofJudges ofthe High Court. 95. TenureofofficeofJudges. 96. Oaths to be taken by judges of the High Court. 97. Membership in political parties. vi The COl1stitution of Zanzibar [R.E. 2006 ----------~~~~~~~----------98. 99. 99A. 100. 101. PART T\VO THE COURT OF APPEAL Repeal of Article 98. Recognition of the Court of Appeal. Functions and Jurisdiction ofthe Court of Appeal. PART THREE OTHER COURTS Establishment of other courts. PART FOUR PROCEDURE OF SERVING COURT ORDERS AND EXECUTING COURT DECREES Execution of court process to be done throughout the entire United Republic of Tanzania. PART FIVE JUDICIAL SERVICE COMMISSION 102. The Judicial Service Commission. 102A. The powers of the Judicial Service Comnllssion. 103. Appointment ofJudicial Officers. vii


===== PAGE 6 =====
[R.E. 2006J The COllstitu tion of Zanzibar CHAPTER SEVEN PART ONE FINANCE PROVISIONS REGARDING THE FINANCES OF THE REVOL UTIONARY GOVERNMENT OF ZANZIBAR 104. 105. 106. 107. 108. 109. 110. 111. 112. 113. Consolidated Fund and other Finances of the Revolutionary Government • of Zanzibar. The budget. Authorisation of expenditure out ofthe Consolidated Fund by Appropriation Act. Payment on the authority of a special document. Expenditure from Contingency Fund. Authorization of expenditure in advance of appropriation Act. Public debt ofthe Revolutionary Government of Zanzibar. Rermmeration of certain officers. 'TIle Controller and Auditor-General of Zanzibar. Removal from office of the Controller and Auditor-General. PART TWO FINANCIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO UNION MATTERS 114. Union Contribution. 115. Powers to expend the allocation. CHAPTER EIGHT CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION 116. Civil Service Commission. 117. Appointment and tenmnation of a member ofthe Civil Service Commission. 118. Appointment of Civil Servants. viii The Constitution of Zanzibar [RE. 2006J ------------------------~------------.----CHAPTER NINE ELECTORAL COMMISSION 119. Zanzibar Electoral Commission. 120. 12l. 122. 123. Constituencies. CHAPTER TEN SPECIAL DEP ARTl\1ENTS Special Departments. Special Departments' Service Commission. Power of the President in the Special Departments. CHAPTER ELEVEN JURISDICTION OF CERTAIN ][NSTITUTIONS OF THE UNION 124. The Constitutional Court, Pennanent Commission of Enquiry and the National Electoral Commission to apply to Zanzibar. CHAPTER TWELVE OTHER INSTITUTIONS OF THE REVOLUTIONARY GOVERNMENT OF ZANZIBAR PART ONE PLANNING'COMMISSION 125. Planning Commission. 126. Members ofthe Commission. 127. Secretary to the Planning Commission. ix


===== PAGE 7 =====
rItE. 20061 The Constitution of Zanzibar PART TWO LOCAL GOVERNMENT AUTHORITIES 128. Local Govcmment. 129. 130. 131. 132. 133. 134. 134A:. 135. Rcsigna6on. CHAPTER THIRTEEN GENERAL PROVISIONS New appointment and notification oftemlination. Pr~cedure for assignment of office responsibility in the Civil Service. Umon Enactments. Conditions for taxation. Interpretation. Repealing of the Constitution of Zanzibar 1979. The name of the Constitution and commencement date. x The Constitution of Zanzibar [R.E.200G] THE CONSTITUTION OF ZANZIBAR PREAMBLE RESOLUTION OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES TO ENACT CONSTITUTION OF ZANZIBAR vVHREAS, the House of Representatives in its session held on the 9 th day of October, 1984 on behalf of the People of Zanzibar realised and resol ved to make historic responsibility ofthe People of Zanzibar be that of fostering unity canying on sociali;;;t revolution in Zanzibar and actively supporting liberation struggle and Revolution strategies within the country, in Africa and World over; AND WHEREAS, we realise the fact that the unity of the People of Zanzibar stems from long time interaction and co-operating starting way back during the days ofindependence struggle up to this stage of being successful which is embodied in our policy of Socialism and Self Reliance; AND WHEREAS, we cherish and take cognisance of the good and revolutionary accomplishment secured by leaders of the Revolution, pioneered by the founder Member of Afro Shiraz Party ASP and the 1964 Revolution the late Elder Statesman Abeid Aman Karume, whose thinking shall be perpetuated and passed from one generation onto another generation in the struggle against colonialism, capitalism, down troddeness, injustice and despondence while advocating Independence and Unity, Justice and Equality and Respect for Human dignity; AND WHEREAS, we are conscious of the fact that Revolutionary teaching and thought shall be protected, fostered and sustained through and by democratic principles; xi


===== PAGE 8 =====
IRE. 2006J The Constitution of Zanzibar AND \VHEREAS, we are further cOhscious of the fact that the struggle and quest to build socialism in Zanzibar and ow' full participation in the revolutionary activities o1'Z3nzibar needs a solid law that guides the people constitutionally basing on thOUght and thinking of workers and fanners; AND \VHEREAS, we the people of Zanzibar, have fllmly arId solenmly resolved to build in our counhy a society fOlmded on the principles offreedom, justice, fratemity and concord; AND WHEREAS, those principles can only be realised in a democratic society in which the Executive is accountable to a House of Representative composed of elected members and representatives ofthe people and also a jUdiciary which is independent arId dispenses justice without fear or favour thereby ensuring that all human rights are preserved and protected and that the duties of every person are faithfully discharged; NOW THEREFORE, THIS CONSTITUTION IS ENACTED BY THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES in its session held on the 9th day of October 1984, on,behalf of People for the purpose of building such a society and ensuring that Zanzibar is governed by a government that adheres to the principles of democracy and socialism. xii The Constitution of Zanzibar [R.E.2006 CHAPTER ONE ZANZIBAR PART ONE ZANZIBAR 1. Zanzibar is an integral part of the United Republic of Tanzania. 2.(1) TIle area of Zanzibar consists of the whole area ofth~ Islands ofUnguja and Pemba and all small Islands surrounding them and mcludes the territorial waters that before the Union formed the then People's Republic of Zanzibar. (2) For the purpose of the efficient discharge of the function~ of the Government, the President of the United Republic in consultatIOn with the President, may divide Zanzibar into Regions, Districts and any other areas in accordance with procedures prescribed. Zanziba The Are of Zanzibar regional and district boundarie 3 (1) There shall be a Seal of the Revolutionary Government of Governme . db h seal. Zanzibar whose insignia shall be as laid down by law enacte y t e House of Representatives. (2) The Revolutionary Government of Zanzibar s~lall ~e empowered to prescribe anything whatsoever that shall serve to Identify the Government il~ accordance with the law as enacted by the House ofRepresentati ves.' 4. Tins Constitution is the Constitution of Zanzibar and shall have The. . J:: • • fArt" 1 ConstItutlOl the force oflaw throughout the Country save lor provlSlons 0 lC e 0 f 80 if arIY legislation is found to be in conflict with this Constitution this Zanzibar. Constitution shall prevail and that law shall be null and void to that extent that conflicts with this Constitution.


===== PAGE 9 =====
.~-----=---_____ II [R.E. 20061_ The Constitution of Zanzibar Zanzibar 10 be a state of multiparty 5. Zanzibar shall be a state of multiparty democracy which shall I uphold the rule oflaw, hwnan rights, equality, peace,justice and equity. I democracy. Distribution ! SA.(1) Zanzibar shall follow the system of I A Zanzibari. Act No. 2 of 2002 S.5. of power. Act No. 2 of 2002 S. 4. I separation of powers between three authorities, the I Executive Authority, the Legislative Authority and the I Judicial Authority. r (2) TIle ExecutiveAutllorityis the Revolutionary Govelnment of Zanzibar, the Legislative Authority is the House of Representatives and the Judicial Authority is the Court. (3) No Authority shall intervene in another Authority except in the manner provided in this Constitution. PART TWO THE PEOPLE 6.(1) There shall be a Zanzibari, the attainment, deprivation.and re-instatement ofZanzibarian status of a person shall be in accordance with the law enacted by the House of Representatives in that respect. (2) Every Zanzibari shall enjoy rights and privileges be fitting a Zanzibari in accordance with this Constitution, and shaII be obliged to perfOInl duties, functions and responsibilities as provided in this Constitution or law enacted by the House of Representatives. 2 The Constitution of Zanzibar [R.E. 200~~L ----------~~==~~~--------~ 7.(1) Any Zanzibari who has attained the age of eighteen years ~~7:t to shall have the right to vote in the election taking place in Zanzibar. A'1d Act No . .: .. d 'tl th .. f lIb of 2002 this right shall be exercIsed 111 accor ance WI 1 e prOVISIOn 0 s S 6. article (2) of this Article together with other provisions of this Constitution and law applicable in Zanzibar on election matters. (2) The House of Representatives may enact a law and make provisions which may bar a Zanzibari from exercising a right to vote from any of the following reasons, that is that Zanzibari: (a) has a citizenship of another COlliltry; (b) has a mental disease certified by the High Court; (c) has been convicted of criminal offence and serving his sentence in the Education Centre, except that a person in custody shall have the right to register and vote; (d) not able or fails to prove or provide certificate of age, citizenship orregistration as a voter. (3) The House of Representatives shall enact a law relatin~ to the election ofthe President, Members of the House of RepresentatIves and Councilors for Local Government and make provision for the followingmatters: (a) (b) establishment of permanent register of voters and provide procedure of correcting the content ofthat register; to indicate the area, time of voter Sf registration and the period of residency in the electoral Constituency for the purpose of voting; 3


===== PAGE 10 =====
_ [RE. 2006J ___ The Constitution of Zanzibar ----------------~-----------------(c) procedure of enabling a voter registered in one part to vote in another part and provide conditions of implementing that procedure; (d) to provide duties and functions of the Electoral Commission and procedure for every election conducted under the leadership and supervision of the Zanzibar Electoral Commission; (4) A part iiom the reasons laid down in this Article there is no other reason which can bar aZanzibari ii-om exercising aright to vote. CHAPTER TWO FUNDAMENTAL OBJECTIVES AND DIRECTIVE PRINCIPI-IESAND POLICIES OF THE REVOLUTIONARY GOVERNMENT OF ZANZIBAR Fundamental objective 8. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the Government, all its of the organs and all persons or authorities exercising executive, leaislative or Govemment. I::r judicial functions to observe the principles of independence, justice and peace. ( The 9.(1) Zanzibar shall be a state that adheres to the principles of Govemment . . and the democracy and soclalJustice. People. (2) Therefore hereunder it is stipulated as follows: (a) (b) sovereignty resides in the people and it is from the people that the Government through this Constitution shall derive all its power and authority; security for the people and their welfare shall be the primary objective of the Government; 4 The Constitution of Zanzibar [R.E.2006] (c) the people shall participate in the affairs of their Government in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution. (3) The structure of the Revolutionary Government of Zanzibar or any of its organs and the discharge of its functions shall be so effected as to take into account the need to promote national unity in the country and the overall goal of attaining democracy. 10. For the purposes of promoting unity and development of the Political people and social welfare in the country it shall be the responsibility of objectives. the Revolutionary Government of Zanzibar to ensure: (1) 111at adequate provision of equal opportunities to all citizens to exercise freedom of movement, rendering of services to all, guaranteeing the right to a Zanzibari to live anywhere in Zanzibar. (2) 111at corruption and abuse of office against the public by any person holding public office is totally eradicated. (3) That national economy is managed and controlled in Economic accordance with the principles and objectives laid down in this objectives. Constitution without let to the need for utmost efficient service, control and manage vital sectors of the economy. (4) That in accordance with the Constitution the economy is planned and promoted in a balanced and integrated manner, economic activities are not conducted in a manner capable of resulting in the concentration of wealth or the major means of production in the hands of a few individuals or a certain group. 5 Social objectives.


===== PAGE 11 =====
[R.E. 2006J The Constitution of Zanzibar Health, educational and cultural objectives. Towards work objectives. (5) 111at in the implementation of the said policy every citizen in telms of justice is treated equally, accorded equal responsibility and opportunity in accordance with the law, hlUllan dignity and other human rights are respected and cherished, freedom, absence offavouritism, impartiality of the Judiciary and opportunity of access to the courts of law is guaranteed and respected. (6) Shall direct its policy toward ensuring that every person has access to adequate health care, equal opportunity to adequate education for all and that Zanzibar culture is protected enhanced and promoted. (7) That every person who is able to work has the opportunity to work, and work means any legitimate activity by which a person eams a living, disadvantaged groups such as the elderly, the sick, children and disabled are assisted. (8) All posts in public offices are responsibilities and are there for the benefit ofthe public and all those who have responsibilities shall be accountable directly to the public or House of Representatives. (9) All Government organs shall and its servants be follow and adhere the international treaties on human rights and good governance. Amendment of the provisions of Chapter Two. Act No. 2 of 2002 S. 8. 10.A The provisions of this part in this Chapter shall not be enforced by any court, and all courts in the country shall have no power to decide any matter either to do or not to be done by any person or authority or law or any Judgement which is in accordance with the provisions of this part in this Chapter. 6 The Constitution of Zanzibar [R.E.2006] CHAPTER THREE PROTECTION OF FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS AND INDIVIDUAL FREEDOM 11.(1) All people are born free and are all equal. (2) Every person is entitled to recognition and respect of his dignity. Equality of people. 12.(1) All persons are equal before the law and are entitled Equality without any discrimination, to protection and equality before the law. b l efore the aw. (2) No law shall make any provision that is discriminatory either of itself or in its effect. (3) The civic rights, duties and interests of evelyperson shall be protected and detennined by the courts oflaw, state organs and others organs established by the law. (4) No person shall be discriminated against by any person or any authority acting urtder any law or in the discharge of the functions of any state office or by any management of any party and its organs . . (5) For the purposes of this Article the expression means to satisfy the needs, rights or other requirements of different persons on the basis of their nationality, tribe, gender, place of origin, political opinion, colour, religion or station in life such that celiain categories of people are regarded as weak: or inferior and are subjected to restrictions or conditions whereas persons of other categories are treated differently or are accorded opportunities or advantage outside the specified conditions or the prescribed necessary qualifications. 7


===== PAGE 12 =====
[RE. 2006J The Constitution of Zanzibar -------------.------------------~---------------------Except that the word "discrimination" shall not be construed in such a way as to restrain the Government from taking necessary measures with the aim of rectifYing peculiar problem in the society. (6) To ensure equality before the law, the govemment shall make procedures which are appropriate or which take into account the following principles namely; (a) when the rights and duties of any person are being detennined by the court or any other agency, that person shall be entitled to a fair hearing and to the right of appeal or other legal remedy against the decision of the court or of the other agency concerned; (b) no person charged with a criminal offence shall be treated as guilty ofthe offence until proved guilty of that offence; . (c) no person shall be punished for any act which at the time of its commission was not an offence under the law, and also no penalty shall be imposed which is heavier than the penalty in force at the time the offence was committed; (d) for the purposes of preserving the right of equality of human beings, human dignity shall be protected in all activities pertaining to criminal investigations and process, and in any other matters for which a person is restrained, or in the execution of a sentence; ( e) speedy hem1ng of the criminal cases and delivering of judgment; 8 The Constitution of Zanzibar {R.E. 2006] (t) the accused in criminal cases has the opportunity of being defended by the advocate of his choice. 13.(1) Every person has the right to the preservation of his life. (2) Every person has the right to live and to the protection of his life by the society in accordance with the law. (3) It is prohibited for a person to be tortured, inhumanly punished or to be given punishment which are degrading and humiliating. Right to life. 14.(1) Every person has the right to freedom and to live as a free Right to person. personal freedom. (2) For the purposes of preserving individual freedom and the right to live as a free person, no person shall be arrested, imprisoned, confmed, detained, deported or otherwise be deprived of his freedom save only; (a) under circumstances and in accordance with procedures prescribed by law; or (b) in the execution of a judgement, order or a sentence given or passed by the court following a decision in a legal proceeding or a conviction for a criminal offence. 15.(1) Every person is entitled to respect and protection of his Right to person, the privacy of his own person, his family and of his matrimonial ~~~vacy life, and respect and protection of his residence and private personal security. communicati.on. 9


===== PAGE 13 =====
[R.E.2006] The Constitution oJ Zanzibar Protection of freedom of movement. ~-------------(2) For the purpose of preserving the person's right in accordance with this Article, the state authority shall lay down legal procedures regarding the circumstances, mamler and extent to which the right to privacy, security of his person, his propeliy and residence may be encroached upon without prejudice to the provisions of this Article. 16.(1) No person shall be denied his freedom of movement and for the purpose of this Article, freedom being referred to means the right of freedom of movement in Zanzibar and the light to live in any part of Zanzibar, the right to enter Zanzibar, the right to leave Zanzibar and the right not to be expelled from Zanzibar. (2) Any curtail on a person's freedom of movement due to that person being restrained or inlprisoned in accordance with the law shall not be constmed as being in conflict with tIns Article. ~;::ctiOl1 17. No person shall be deprived of his property interest or right deprivation in that propelty except and upon compliance with the following of conditions: property. (a) that the acquisition and occupancy ofthe property is of utmost inlportance for defence and security of the people health requirement, town plam1ing and any other development in the public interest; (b) that the need to acquire the property in question is absolutely important to the extent that it legalises its acquisition even ifit be to the detriment of its owner; 10 The Constitution oJ Zanzibar {R.E.200G] (c) that there exists a law in respect of which acquisition or occupation of the property provides for fair and adequate compensation. 18.(1) Without prejudice to the relevant laws of the land, every The person has the right to freedom of opinion and expression, and to freedom of seek, receive and impart or disseminate infonnation and ideas through expression any media regardless of national frontiers and also has the right of freedom from interference with his communications. (2) Every citizen has the right to be infOlmed at all times of various events in the country and in the world at large which are of importarlce to the lives and activities of the people and also of issues of impOltance to society. 19.(1) Every person has the right to freedom of thought or Right to conscience, belief or faith and choice in matters of religion, including ~7cdom the freedom to change his religion or faith. religion. (2) Without prejudice to the relevant laws the profession of religion, worship and propagation of religion shall be free and a plivate affair of an individual; and the affairs and management of religious bodies shall not be part ofthe activities ofthe state authority. (3) In this Article reference to the word "religion" shall be construed as inc1udingreference to religious denominations and cognate expressions shall be construed accordingly. 20.(1) Every person is entitled to freedom, subject to one's free Protection . . of freedom ChOiCe to freely and peaceably assemble, aSSOCIate and co-operate of assembly with other persons, and more specially to foml or join associations or and . . orgarrisations fonned for workers human rights organisations or other aSSOCIatIOn. 11


===== PAGE 14 =====
~~2006J The Constitution of Zanzibar Freedom to participate in public affairs, right to work, and receive remuneration. organisations for his benefit and which are established in accordance with the laws ofthe land. (2) Nothing provided for by or carried out in accordance with any law of the land shall be construed as being in conflict with or in contravention of this Article to the extent that principal legislation provides: (a) matters related to the interests of defence and security of the citizens, health aspects and those ofsociety; (b) matters related to the preservation of rights and freedoms of other persons; ( c ) matters related to certain limitations for Govemment officials, military personnel or any other persons appointed on their free will. 21.( 1) Every Zanzibari is entitled to take part in matters peltaining to govemance of the country, either directly or through representatives freely elected. (2) Every Zanzibari has the right and the freedom to participate fully ill the process leading to the decision on matters affecting him, his well-being or the nation. (3) Every Zanzibari has the right to work and is entitled to equal opportunity and right on equal tenns to hold any office or discharge allY function under the state authority of Zanzibar. 12 The Constitution of Zanzibar [R.E. 2006] (4) Every person, without discrimination of any kind, is entitled to remuneration co'nmlensurate with his work and all persons working according to their ability shall be remunerated according to the measure and nature ofthe work done. 22.(1) Work alone creates material wealth in society, and is the Duty to source of well-being ofthe people and themeasure of human dignity, fnar~~;~ate every person has the duty to: (a) participate voluntarily and honestly in lawful and productive work; and (b) observe work discipline and strive to attain the individual and group productive targets desired or set bylaw. (2) Notwithstanding the provisions of sub-article (1) ofthis Article there shall be no forced labour in Zanzibar. 23.(1) Every person has the duty to observe and abide by this Duty to Constitution and the laws of Zanzibar, to take legal action to ensure the ;~~dl:!~ of protection of this Constitution and the laws of the land. the land, duty to safeguard (2) Every person has the duty to protect the natural resources public of Zanzibar, the propelty of the state Authority, all property collectively property and owned by the people and also to respect another person's property. Defence of the (3) All persons shall be required by law to safeguard the property of Zanzibar and collectively to combat all fonus of waste and squander, and to manage the economy of Zanzibar assiduously with the attitude of people who are masters ofthe destiny oftheirnation. 13 Nation.


===== PAGE 15 =====
IR.E.2006] The Constitution of Zanzibar Limitations to the rights and freedoms and safeguard to the righl~ and obligation. Act No. 2 0/2002 S. 14. (4) Every Zanzibari has the duty to protect, preserve and mai ntain independence, sovereignty, territory and unity of Zanzibar. (5) The House of Representatives may enact appropriate laws to enable the people to serve in the forces and in the defence of the nation. 24.(1) The human rights and freedoms, the principles of which are set out in this Constitution, shall not be exercised by a person in a manner that causes interference with or curtailment of the rights and freedoms of other persons or of the public interest and can be limited by the law enacted by the House of Representatives ifthat limitation is necessary and agreeable in the democratic system. In any case such limitation: (a) shall not limit the right not to be tortured, inhumanly punished andhurniliated; or (b) shall not limit the foundation of that right; or (c) shall not bring more hanns to the society more than what is there. (2) Any person alleging that any provision in this Part of this Chapter or in any law concerning his right or duty owed to him has been, is being or is likely to be violated by any person anywhere in Zanzibar, may institute proceedings for redress in the High Court. The High Court shall have the power to declare and order compensation to any concerned person. 14 The Constitution of Zanzibar (R.E.2006J_ (3) The application against the decision ofthe High Court in the suit instituted against the provisions of this Chapter of the Constitution shall be heard by the High Court before three judges without including the judge who has decided that question on the first occasion. Those three judges shall be appointed by the ChiefJustice. (4) Subject to the other provisions of this Constitution, the High Court shall have original jurisdiction to hear and detennine any matter brought before it in pursuant to this Article; and the state authority may enact legislation for the purposes of: (a) regulating procedure for instituting proceedings pursuant to this Article; (b) specifying the powers of the High Court in relation to the hearing of proceedings instituted pursuant to this ArticIe; (c) ensuring the effective exercise ofthe powers of the High Court, the preservation and enforcement of the rights, freedoms and duties in accordance with this Constitution. 25.(1) Every person in Zanzibar without prejudice to that person's tribe, place of orilPn or domicile or any other relations whatsoever, political lineage, colour, religion or sex has the right and duties to enjoy fundan1entaI human rights and personal freedom provided that personal freedom shall not be exercised in a manner that neither infringes upon the rights and freedoms of others nor the public interest, that person shall be entitled to get and receive protection of each and all of the following: 15 Fundamental rights, and individual freedoms.


===== PAGE 16 =====
___ IRJ~. 200GL _________ T._7z_e _C_O_l1s_tl_-tl_ItI_'O_Il-,of,,--Z_nl_1Z_ib_a_r _______ _ (a) the tight to live, the right to individual freedom and protection in accordance with the law; (b) fi-eedom ofthought, fi~eedom of expression, freedom of assembly and association; and ( c) the lights to domestic privacy and protection of one's property and the right for that property not to be taken away without fair compensation. (2) The provisions ofthis Chapter are intended to enable the preservation of the said rights and freedoms in accordance with prescribed limitations in respect of those rights and freedoms as provided for in the relevant Articles for the purpose of ensuring that the enjoyment of those rights and the individual freedoms does not infringe upon the rights and freedoms of others or national interest in general. Institution of suit. Act No, 2 of 2002 S, 15, 25A.(1) Any person may institute a suit in the High Court if he sees that the Constitution is violated or is being violated or is likely to be violated. (2) The High Court shall have the power to: \ (a) order any officer or any government organ to send required information and the High Court may do that by application or on its own motion; (b) to declare and order that this Constitution has been violated, being violated or likely to be violated, and the High Court may give order to the officer or govenunent organ concerned. 16 The Constitution of Zanzibar [R.E.2006] CHAPTER FOUR THE EXECUTIVE PART ONE THE PRESIDENT 26.(1) There shall be a President of Zanzibar who shall be the The Office . d Ch . f h R 1 t' of the Head ofGovemment ofZanzlbar an alrman 0 t e evo U lOnary President Council. and qualifications [or election (2) Any person may be eligible for election as President ifthat 0 f , PreSIdent. person: (a) is a Zanzibari by birth; (b) has attained the age of forty years; (c) has qualifications that enable him to be elected as member ofthe House of Representatives; (d) is a member of and a candidate nominated by a political party duly registered in accordance with Political Parties Act 1992. \, 27.(1) The President shall be elected in accordance with this Election of Constitution and in accordance with the law enacted by the House of President Representatives conceming the election of the President and Chairman of the Revolutionary Council. (2) The election ofthe President shall take place on a date appointed by the Zanzibar Electoral Commission. 17


===== PAGE 17 =====
{I-LE.2006J 1'l1e Constitution of Zanzibar --~-----------------------~~~-------------------Term of office of President (3) The election of the President shall be held within a period of not] ess than thirty days or more than sixty days before expiry of the term of office of the incumbent President. (4) For the purposes of elections, Zanzibar shall be considered to be one constituency. Any person who is registered as a voter so as to be able to vote for a member of the House of Representatives shall be entitled to vote in the election of the President. 28.(1) Pursuant to this Constitution a person elected President shall hold the office of President until: (a) successor President takes oath of office of President; (b) he dies while holding office ofthe President; (c) when the President tenders resignation and that resignation is accepted; (d) when he is elected President ofthe United RepUblic of Tanzania; ( e) when the House of Representatives is dissolved; or due to any other reason or cause he has ceased to be a leader in accordance with other provisions of this Constitution. (2) Pursuant to provisions of sub-article (1) of this Article the President shall relinquish office after five years with effect from the date, when: 18 lhe Constitution of Zanzibar [R.E.2006] (a) (b) if it is the first time for that person to be elected President pursuant to this Constitution he subscribed to an oath of allegiance and an oath pertaining to the office of President; and for any other reason the last person to hold office of President pursuant to this Constitution when that person took oath of allegiance and an oath as prescribed, and if death had not occUlTed that person would have taken oath of office of President. (3) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of this Article of this Constitution, no person shall be elected to be President of Zanzibar for more than two consecutive terms of a period offive years each. 29. If the United Republic is at war and Zanzibar is also involved Extension . . . h Id l' of fIve and if the President considers that It IS not practIcable to 0 e ectlons, years the House of Representatives, by a resolution, may extend the period period_ offive years in sub-article (2) ofArtic1e 28 from time to time save ~hat no such extension shall exceed a period of six months at anyone time continuously. 30.(1) No person shall be eligible for election as President if: Disqualification of (a) (b) by commission or omission of any deed or act .had Presiden t. he been member ofthe House of RepresentatIves would cause him to cease being a member of the House of Representatives; for two past consecutive terms that person has been elected to the office of President. 19


===== PAGE 18 =====
[R.E-200G] The Constitution of Zanzibar Oath of the President. Removal from office of the President due to ill health. This sub-article however should not be construed as disqua1i{ying that person from being elected President ofthe United Republic of Tanzania. (2) Dming his term of office, the President shall not hold any other remwlerative office save that of President. 31.(1) A person assmning office of the President before assuming the functions of the office of President shall take and subscribe the oath ofallegiance and such other oath for the execution offunctions as may be prescribed by the House of Representatives, but in any event he shall assume office before the expiration of not more than seven days after it is declared that he has been elected President. (2) The oaths referred to above shall be administered by the ChiefJustice of Zanzibar, in the absence ofthe ChiefJustice, they shall be administered by a person acting in that capacity. 32.(1) Any decision regarding the issue of the President or any person discharging the functions of the President or who is about to discharge the functions of the President is unable to discharge the functions ofhis office due to physical or mental infinnity, shall be decided in accordance with Article. (2) Where the issue pertains to the question of the President being unable to discharge the functions ofhis office by reason of physical or mental infirmity and the Chief Justice is requested by the Revolutionary Council to deal with the issue, then: (a) the Chief Justice shall appoint a committee of not less than five persons amongst whom there shall be doctors and two persons who qualify to serve as High Court Judges; 20 The Constitution of Zanzibar [R.E. 2006J --------------~~~~~~------------------~. Cb) the committee shall enquire into the issue ofthe state ofheaIth ofthe President after which it shall report to the ChiefJustice expressing its opinion whether due to physical or mental infirmity ofthe President he is unable to discharge the functions of his office; and (c) the Chief Justice after considering the report shall certify to the Speaker of the House of Representatives that due to physical or mental infinmtythe President is incapable of discharging the functions of his office, the Speaker shall submit the report to the House of Representatives for infonnation. 33.(1) Where the office ofthe President and Chainnan ofthe RevolutionaryCOlmcil becomes vacant: (a) by reason of death; (b) by resignation ofthe incumbent President; (c) by reason ofill health; the following persons shall fIll the vacancy in the following order of sequence (i) the Chief Minister, and should he be away; (ii) the Speaker of the House of Representatives and should he also be away; (iii) the Chief Justice of Zanzibar. 21 Vacancy in the office of the President


===== PAGE 19 =====
[R.E. 2006] The Constitution of Zanzibar ~---------------------Election procedure where the office of the President is vacant. Act No. 5 0/1990. (2) In the event that the presidency: (a) due to the reason that the President shall be absent from Tanzania; or (b) for any other reason whatsoever, the President, under his hand in writing and subject to specified instructions of the President, shall delegate the duties and functions of the President shall be discharged by one ofthe following in accordance with the following order hereunder: the Chief Minister and ifhe is away; one member ofthe Revolutionary Council who is aminister with a longer period of experience in such matters when compared to others. (3) Where any person discharges the duties and functions of the office of the President in accordance with sub-articles (1) and (2) of this Article, shall continue to discharge those functions until the return of one ofthe persons who preceded him in terms of sub-article (1) of tlus Aliicle until the election of another President or in the case of subarticle (2) of this Article until such time when the President shall have returned in the country or until such time when he shall revoke the powers delegated to that person. 34.(1) Where the office of the President becomes vacant by reason of death of the President or by resignation ofthe President or due to ill health in accordance with Article 33 ofthis Constitution, the vacancy shall be filled in the following manner: 22 The Constitution of Zanzibar [R.E. 2006) --------------------------~------------------~ (i) where the then President has served for a period under four years, the person next following in tenns of succession shall assume office of the President for the time being and elections shall be held within a period of one hundred and twenty days; and the elections shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures pmsuantto sub-articles (2) to (7) of this Articles; (ii) where the then President had served for a period offom or more than four years, the person next following in terms of succession shall assume office ofthe President for the remainder period of Presidency; (ill) the person who shall hold the office of the President shall be vested with full powers of the President according to this Constitution and he shall appoint the Chief Minister, the Cabinet and other leaders as he shall deem it fit so to do. (2) Where any ofthe situations mentioned in this Constitution occurs which necessitates the holding of Presidential elections, every political party that opts and wishes to take part in the Presidential elections shall submit to the Zanzibar Electoral Commission, one name of its member that it wishes to contest Presidential elections for Zanzibar. (3) Proposals for prospective Presidential candidates shall be submitted to the Zanzibar Electoral Commission on the day and time so appointed in accordance with the law enacted by the House of 23


===== PAGE 20 =====
[R.E. 2006J The Constitution a/Zanzibar Salary and other allowances of President. Representatives and a person shall not be lawfuUyproposed unless his proposal is supported by registered voters whose nwnber and in which l11aIUler shall be spelt out in accordance with the law enacted by the House of Representatives. (4) Where on the appointed date and time for submission of proposed names of candidates it so happens that only one candidate is lawfully proposed, the Zanzibar Electoral Commission, shall submit that name to the electorate who shall cast votes for or against in accordance with the provisions of this Article and the Constitution. (5) Presidential elections for the President of Zanzibar shall be held on the day so appointed by the Zanzibar Electoral Commission in accordance with the law enacted by the House of Representatives. (6) All matters and details pertaining to the election of the President of Zanzibar shall be as provided for in the law enacted by the House of Representatives in that behalf (7) Where a candidate has been declared by the ZaIlzibar Electoral Commission to have been elected President in accordance with this Article, no court whatsoever shall be empowered to enquire into that candidate's election. 35.(1) The President shall be paid a salary and allowances and on retirement shall be paid a pension, gratuity or allowances as it shall be resol ved by the House of Representatives. (2) The salary and other allowances ofthe President shall not be reduced during his tenure of office. 24 The Constitution 0/ Zanzibar [R.E. 2006] --------~~~~~~==--------~(3) All the moneys referred to in this Article shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund. 36 (1) No criminal proceedings shall be commenced or continued President's • . ImmUnIty against the President during the President's tenure of office, or agamst from Legal any person for the time being discharging the duties and functions of ~::i~:~~illgs the President in accordance with the provisions of Article 33 ofthe office. Constitution. (2) During the tenure of office, no civil proceedings shall be instituted or continued in court against the president, in respect of anything done or not done, or against any person discharging the duties and functions of the President. (3) Where there is an existing law which provides for specific period of time limit within which court proceedings of whatsoever nature may be commenced against any person, the whole period that person is President or discharges the functions of the President shall not be taken to fall into the limitation period in accordance with the law in case all the court proceedings mentioned in sub-article (1) or (2) are against the person discharging duties and functions ofthe President. 37.(1) Without prejudice to the provisions of Article 36 ofthis Constitution, the House of Representatives may by a resolution, remove the President fi-orn:office if a motion to impeach the President shall be moved and carried in accordance with conditions ofthis Article. (2) Without prejudice to the provisions of this Article no motion to impeach the President shall be moved unless it is alleged t~at ~he President has committed acts which generally violate the Constltutlon 25 Impeachment by the House of Representatives.


===== PAGE 21 =====
[R.E.200G] The Constitution of Zanzibar or has COllducted himself in a manner that lowers the esteem of the Union betvveen Tanganyika and Zanzibar, arld no such motion shaH be moved within the period oftwelve months from the time a similar motion was moved and rejected by the House of Representatives. . (3) The House of Representatives shall not pass a motion to lmpeach the President save only if: (a) written notice signed arId supported by not less than one half of all members of the House of Representatives is submitted to the Speaker thirty days prior to the sitting at which such motion is intended to be moved in the House of Representatives specifying the wrong committed by the President aIld proposing that a Special Committee of Inquiry be constituted to inquire into the charges brought against the President; (b) at aIlytime after the Speaker receives the notice duly signed by the members of the House of Representatives and satisfies himself that the provisions of the Constitution for moving the motion have been complied with, the Speaker without debate shall ask the House of Representatives to vote on the motion to constitute a Special Committee of Inquiry, aIld ifthe motions if supported by not less thaIl two thirds of all the members ofthe House of Representatives, the Speaker shall announce the names ofthe members of the Special Committee of Inquiry; 26 Cc) The Constitution of Zanzibar IRE. 2006J the Special Committee ofInquiry for the pUlposes ofthis Article shall consist of the following members, that is to say: (i) the Chief Justice of Zanzibar who shall be ChairmaIl of the Committee; (ll) a Justice of Appeal ofthe Court of Appeal of Tanzania; (iii) any Judge from any member country of Commonwealth; (iv) four members from the Standing Committee of the House of Representatives on Constitution and Legal Affairs Committee including the ChairmaIl of that Committee; (d) within seven days after the Special Committee of Inquin;has been constituted, it shall sit, to inquire into aIld analyse the charges preferred against the President, and as soon as possible shall submit its report to the House of Representatives giving its opinion of whether the charges preferred against the President are of any basis or baseless; (e) the President shall have the right to defend himself aIld to be represented before the Special Committee of Inquiry. (4) Where the Special Committee ofInquiry reports to the House of Representatives that something in the charges preferred 27


===== PAGE 22 =====
[RE.200G] The Constitution of Zanzibar against the President has no basis, then the House of Representatives shall not concem itself any further with the motion to impeach the President in that respect. (5) Where the Special Committee ofInquiry reports to the House of Representatives that the charges preferred against the President have a basis, the issue of impeachment of the President shall be brought to the full house of the House of Representatives, and after debate the House of Representatives, may by vote of not less than two thirds majority of all the members of House of Representatives pass a resolution that the impeachment charges have been proven and that he is unworthy of continuing to hold the office of President; whereupon the President shall be obliged to resign before the expiry of three days from the day the House of Representatives passed the resolution. (6) 1ile Speaker of the House of Representatives shall officially infonn the President and the Chainnan of the Zanzibar Electoral Commission about such resolution. (7) Pursuant to this Article no proceedings whatsoever shall be commenced or continued while the House of Representatives stands adjourned. (8) In the event the President ceases to hold the office of President by reason of the charges against him being proved: (i) he shall not be entitled to receive any payment by way of pension or to receive any benefits or other privileges which he has under the Constitution or any law enacted by the House of Representatives; and 28 The Constitution of Zanzibar [R.E. 2006J (ll) for a period offive years starting from the day he was obliged to resign he shall be disqualified to contest for the Presidency or member of tbe House of Representatives. Provide that ifthe President has served for a five years period and the impeachment occurs during his second tetID, he shall be paid one half of all the payments and privileges he is entitled to in accordance with this Constitution or any other law enacted by the House of Representatives . 38. It shall be the duty of the government to maintain the status of Status of a person who leaves office of the President due to not being re-elected, fpormedr res! ent. expiry of his term of office, resignation or due to any other cause provided for under this Constitution and signified as such by law enacted by the House of Representatives in that behalf PART TWO THE CHIEF MINISTER 39.(1) There shall be Chief Minister for Zanzibar who shall be The Chief appointed by the President. ~/nister (2) The President shall appoint the Chief Minister from amongst members of the House of Representatives on condition that no appointment of the Chief Minister shall be made during all that period 'I' the discharge of duties and functions of the office of the President shall 1 be perfonned by any other person save the President himself. j 1 i i (3) The Chief Minister shall be the principal adviser to the President in the execution of his functions and shall have the authority over the control, supervision and execution of the day-to-day function 29 Zanzibar.


===== PAGE 23 =====
[R.E. 200.:..!6J'--______ ---=T.:..:.':..:.le_C:..:,°:..:.Il:..:.st:..:.it:..:.u.::.:.ti.::.:.°I..:...l -==of:..:.Z::.a:..:.':..:.lZ.:..:ib..:,:a:..:.r _______ _ and affairs of the Revolutionary Government of Zanzibar and also shall be the Leader of Govemment business of the Revolutionary Govemment of Zanzibar in the House of Representatives. (4) cDle Chief Minister, before assmning ofilce, shall take and subscribe the oath of allegiance and such other oath of office as shall be presclibed by the House of Representatives. Vacancy in 40. Where the office of the Chief Minister becomes vacant the Office of Chief due to: Minister. Resolution of Vote of no confidence. (a) death or resignation; (b) the President having so ordered; (c) the holder of that office has ceased to be a member of the House of Representatives save in the case of the House of Representatives being dissolved; (d) the newly elected President is just about to assume office, the President shall appoint the Chief Minister. 41.(1) Notwithstanding the provisions of this Constitution, the House of Representatives may pass a resolution of no confidence in the Chief Minister in case such resolution shall be moved proposing a vote of no confidence and that resolution is carried in accordance with the provisions of this Alticle. (2) Without prejudice to the provisions of this Article, amotion for a vote of no confidence in the Chief Minister shall not be moved in the House of Representatives if: 30 __ ______ ~1:~n=e~C:..:o:..:.l1~st=it=u=tio:..:I~12of:..:.Z::.~a::.l1=z.:..:ib:..:.a~ r ________ ~r~R __ .E.2006J (a) six months have not elapsed since the C1uefMinister was appointed by the President; (b) nine months have not elapsed since a similar motion was moved in the House of Representatives and the House of Representatives rejected the motion. (3) The motion of no confidence in the Chief Minister shall not be passed by the House of Representatives save only if: (a) a written notice, signed and supported by not less than one half of all members of the House of Representatives is submitted to the Speaker, at least fourteen days prior to the day the motion is intended to be moved in the House of Representatives; Cb) the Speaker satisfies himselfthat the provisions of this Constitution have been complied with and that the motion has explained the reasons for lack of confidence, then the motion shall be moved in the House of Representatives. (4) Where the Speaker is satisfied and orders the motion to . be moved in the House ofRepresentati ves the motion shall be moved in the House of Representatives as soon as possible in accordance with the standing orders of the House of Representatives. (5) The resolution for a vote of no confidence in the Chief Minister shall be passed only if it is supported by a two thirds maj ority of all the members of House of Representatives. 31


===== PAGE 24 =====
[R.E.2006] The Constitution of Zanzibar Ministries of Revolutio· nary Govemmclll of Zanzibar. (6) As soon as possible, and in any event, within two days from the day the House of Representatives passed the vote of no confidence ill the Chief Minister, the Speaker shall submit that resolution to the President, the Chief Minister shall be required to resign, and the President shall appoint another member of the House of Representatives to be Chief Minister. (7) In the event the Chief Minister ceases to hold office due to a resolution of vote of no confidence: (i) he shall have no right to be paid any pension or any other allowances or gratuity in accordance with the Constitution or any other law enacted by the House of Representatives, and eii) he will retain his being member ofthe House of Representatives but he shall not be entitled to be appointed Chief Minister, Minister, Deputy Minister or Regional COlmnissioner for the whole of that remainder life of the House of Representatives. PART THREE MINISTERS, DEPUTY MINISTERS AND THE REVOLUTIONARY COUNCIL 42.(1) There shall be ministries ofthe Revolutionary Government of Zanzibar as shall be established by the President. (2) The President shall appoint Ministers from amongst members ofthe House of Representatives on consultation with the 32 The Constitution of Zanzibar [R.E.2006] Chief Minister. In the event that there is need to appoint a Minister during the period the House of Representatives is dissolved, a person who was a member of the House of Representatives prior to its dissolution may be appointed to hold that office. 43.(1) There shall be a Revol utionary Council which shall comprise The of the President, Chief Minister, Ministers together with other members Revolutionary as the President shall deem it fit. Council. (2) Members of the Revolutionary Council shall be appointed by the President from amongst members of the House of Representatives. (3) The Attorney General shall attend all meetings of the Revolutionary Council and shall have all the rights of a member of that Council. (4) The functions of the Revolutionary Council shall be: (a) to assist and advise the President regarding all matters of the Revolutionary Government of Zanzibar; (b) to co-ordinate the functions ofthe President, Chief Minister and the Ministries of the Revolutionary Government of Zanzibar in the exercise of their fimctions. (5) 111e Revolutionary Council shall collectively be responsible to the House of Representatives and the people in general regarding all matters implemented by and or the President's order or the Chief Minister or any other Minister in the execution of his functions. 33


===== PAGE 25 =====
[R.E. 20061 The Constitution of Zanzibar Assignment of Ministers to Ministries. Meeting of the Council. (6) The provisions in sub-articles (4) and (5) of this Article shall not apply with regard to: (a) appointment and dismissal ofthe Chief Minister, Minister, members ofthe Revolutionary Council and Deputy Ministers pursuant to Articles 39,42 and 47 or appointment of any Minister WIder Article 44; (b) dissolution of the House of Representatives; or (c) matters provided for in Article 59 (which concern prerogative of mercy). 44.( 1) All the duties ofthe Revolutionary Govemment of Zanzibar inc1 uding the administration of any department of the Government may be assigned to the Chief Minister and other Ministers as the President shall so signify in writing. (2) Members of the Revolutionary Council who shall not have been assigned ministJ.ies shall be Ministers without portfolio. 45.(1) TIle President who is Chairman of the Revolutionary COllilcil shall preside over all meetings and in his absence, the Chief Minister shall be acting Chairnlan. (2) In the event that the Chief Minister is absent from Zanzibar then the meetings shall be presided over by the person discharging the duties and fimctions ofthe President. (3) The quOlUIll for the Revolutionary Council meeting shall be two thirds of all the members. 34 The Constitution of Zanzibar fR.E.2006J ------------------~~~~~----------------~-46. A member of the Revolutionary Council shall not assume office until he has taken oath of allegiance and an oath for the due discharge of the duties of his office as may be prescribed by the House of Representatives. Oath of allegiance. 47. The President in consultation with the Chief Minister may Deputy appoint Deputy Ministers from amongst members of the House of Ministers Representatives in order to assist the President, the Chief Minister and Ministers in the execution of their functions and they shall not assume office until they have subscribed an oath of allegiance and an oath for the due discharge of the duties oftheir offices as may be prescribed by the House of Representatives. 48. The Office of a Minister, Member of the Revolutionary COllilcil and Deputy Minister shall be vacant: Vacancy in offices of Minister, (a) Member of where the President shall remove him from office in th e Revoiutiowriting and signified by Government Seal; nary Council. (b) if a member ceases to be member of the House of (c) (d) Representatives for any reason other than dissolution of the House of Representatives; if the President accepts the resignation of the person concerned; immediately before the President assumes office. 49.(1) There shall be a Secretary to the Revolutionary Council Secretary who shall be appointed by the President and who shall be the Chief ~e~~~utiO­ Executive Officer in office of the Council and shall comply with nary Council. directions issued to him by the President, to work out a programme 35


===== PAGE 26 =====
[R.E.2006J The Constitution of Zanzibar Principal Secretaries. Objectives of the Government of Zanzibar. for meetings cUld record minutes of those meetings, to notify relevant persons and institutions' decisions thereof and shall discharge other duties and functions as shall be directed from time to time by the President. (2) The Secretary to the Revolutionary Council shall be the head of/he civil service of the Revolutionary Govemment of the Zanzibar: 50.(1) Where the Chief Minister or any other Minister is responsible for any Ministry ofthe Government, he shall be held responsible for that Ministry and without prejudice to the general terms of supervision, a Ministry of the Government shall be under the supetintendence of the Principal Secretary whose designation shall be the civil service. (2) There shall be a Principal SecretalY in the Office of the President and a Principal Secretary in the Office of the Chief Minister. (3) All Principal Secretaries shall be appointed by the President. (4) The Secretalyto the Revolutionary Council together with any other Principal Secretary or Deputy Principal Secretary shall not assume the functions of his office until he has subscribed an taken oath of allegiance and an oath for the due discharge of functions as may be prescribed by the House of Representatives. PART FOUR GOVERNMENT AUTHORITY 51. 11le authority of the Govemment of Zanzibar shall be vested ]n the President pursuant to tillS Constitution the President himselfmay 36 The Constitution of Zanzibar exercise the authority of the Government directly or by delegating that authority to other leaders subordinate to himself. It is hereby declared that without prejudice to the provisions of this Article, it shall be lawful for any legislation to provide for delegation of authority to discharge duties and functions of any public entity to any other person who is not the President o fZanzibar. 52. The President of Zanzibar, subject to directions of the law J;~~ide!1t shall not be obliged to take the advice given to him by any person in not bound to adhere the perfomlance of his functions. to any advice. 53. Pursuant to this Constitution and without prejudice to Chapter Establisheight or any other law enacted by the House of Representatives the :r~~~so~nd power to: (a) establish and abolish office in Zanzibar; and (b) appoint officers to those offices, to promote officers during their tenure of office, dismiss and take disciplinary action in respect of officers appointed to those offices, shall vest in the President. appointment of officers. 54.(1) Save as otherwise provided for in this Constitution or any Tenure of h Id' ffi' h G fZ 'b office 1D other law, any person 0 mg 0 Ice 1ll t e ovemment 0 anZl ar service of shall occupy that office at the pleasure of the President. the Revolutionary (2) In this Article, office of the Revolutionary Govemment of Govern'b G ffi S 'alD fc P t' ment of Zanzl armeans ovemmento ce, peCI epariment or reven IOn Zanzibar. of Smuggling, Education Centre, National Service force or any other activity initiated by the Revolutionary Government of Zanzibar pursuant to this Constitution and includes all offices in Govenmlent parastatals. 37


===== PAGE 27 =====
fR.E. 20061 The Constitution of Zanzibar The A ltorney Cieneral. Functions of the Attorney General. ._-55.( 1) Tl1ere shall be an Attomey General for Zanzibar who shall be a Zanzibari and who shall be appointed by the President. (2) A person shall not qualify to be appointed to hold office of the Attomey-General or to petiOlID the fWlctiOns of the Attomey-General save only ifhe is qualified to be a lawyer in Zanzibar and he is so qualified for a period of not less than seven years. (3) The Attomey-General shall be an ex officio member of the House of Representatives and shall remain such member until the President revokes his appointment or immediately before a newly elected President asswnes office of the President. 56. 111eAttomeyGeneral shall be the Chief Legal Adviser for the Revolutionary Govemment of Zanzibar and shall perform other legal duties that shall be submitted to him or as shall be directed by the President or pursuant to this Constitution or any other laws of the land. "Director of Public Prosecutions. Act No. 2 oJ 2002 S. 17. 56A(1)(a) There shall be a Director of Public Prosecutions appointed by the President. (b) the Director ofPublic Prosecutions will hold his office for a term of five years and may be reappointed for other tenns of five years. (2) A person shall not be appointed as a Director of Public Prosecutions unless he has qualifications of being appointed ajudge of High Court. (3) The Director of Public Prosecutions shall have the power to do the following: 38 The Constitution of Zanzibar [R.E.2006j (a) (b) to institute and prosecute all criminal cases against any person before any Comi (except martial court) in relation to any offence in which the person is charged; to take and prosecute all criminal cases which were instituted earlier by any person or other organ; (c) to stop any criminal suit instituted by any person or other organ. (4) The power of the Director of Public Prosecutions under sub-article (3) may be exercised by the Director of Public Prosecutions himself or other officers with the direction or special order from the Director of Public Prosecutions. (5) The power ofthe Director of Public Prosecutions under paragraph (b) and (c) of sub-article (3) of this Article shall be in his hands and shall not be interfered by any person or organ. Except when another person or organ has instituted a criminal suit, nothing in this sub-article will bar the person or organ concemed from withdrawing the suit with the Court's pennission. (6) For the purpose of this Article, any appeal from the jUdgement of a criminal case in any Court or any question oflaw left from that suit so that it could be sent to another Court, it will be taken to be part of that suit. For consideration that the powers of the Director of Public prosecutions tmder sub-article (3 ) (c) of this Article will not be implemented for the purpose of any appeal of the person convicted of any criminal offence or in relation to any question of law kept purposefully for that person. 39


===== PAGE 28 =====
The Constitution of Zanzibar (7) In exercising his powers according to the provision of this Article the Director of Public Prosecution is not bound to follow any order or direction of any person or any government department. But the provisions ofthis Article will not bar the Court from using its power for the purpose of investigating whether the Director of Public Prosecutions is exercising his powers according to the provisions of this Constitution or not. (8) In using his powers under this Article the Director of Public Prosecutions will take into consideration the importance of the nation in seeing that justice is done and his intention of stopping the abuse of the judicial organs is implemented. (9) The Director of Public Prosecutions shall not be removed from his five years term except for reasons and procedures laid down for the removal of a High Court Judge according to Article 95 of this Constitution. (i 0) TIle House of Representatives may enact laws regarding the following matters: (a) comtproceeding in general; (b) officers or any person who qualify whom the Director of Public Prosecutions may delegate his powers; (c) appeal procedmes and time of appeal against the decision of any court in criminal cases; (d) procedure of commencing or instituting a criminal case by a private individual or government and nongovernment institutions; 40 " I _______ ~T.:.:'h:::...e ..::c:,::'0:..::;rls:::.t::itu=t:::io:..:::.n:....:0:.L1...::Z:.::a=rl:::zi:,::b:::ar ________ ..!.[:..:R=.E. 2006J (e) to be a criminal offence for any person to interfere or attempt to interfere in the exercise of the powers of the Director of Public Prosecutions according to tIlis Constitution or any law. 57. The Attomey General and Director of Public Prosecutions Oath of shall not assunle office lilltil he has taken oath of allegiance and an oath allegiance. for the due discharge of the functions of his office as may be prescribed by the House of Representatives. 58.(1) The President may appoint any person as his Special Adviser Special . fun' advisers. SO as to assist the President in the discharge of his dutIes and ctlOns. (2) Appointment under this Article shall be at the pleasme of the President and shall not be continued in the event another person asswnes office of the President. 59. The President may: ( a) pardon any person convicted of any offence and may grant such pardon lillconditionally or on conditions; (b) grant temporary or permanent suspension of execution of an y sentence handed down by any court in respect of any person for an offence committed by that person; (c) change any sentence handed down to any person in respect of any offence and make it less than what it originaIlywas; 41 Prerogative of mercy.


===== PAGE 29 =====
Advisory COlTImillcc on prerogative of mercy. The Constitution of Zanzibar (d) absolutely or partially pardon any person sentenced in respect of any offence, or in the case of decree for confiscation decided upon by the Govemment against that person. 60.(1) There shall be a Presidential Advisory Committee in the exercise of prerogative of mercy whose members shall be the following: (a) the Attomey General who shall be the Chairman; (b) not less than three and not more than five members who shall be appointed by the President and amongst the members at least one should be a Minister and another who should have qualifications ofbeing a doctor in Zanzibar. (2) A member of the committee appointed pursuant to subarticle (l)(b) of this Artic1e shall continue in that position for the period stipulated in the order of appointment. Taking into account vacancy shalloccm: (i) in the event a person appointed to be a member is a Minister, when that person ceases to be a Minister; (ii) the President so orders in writing. (3) 1be connnittee shall be empowered to transact its business notwithstanding a vacancy in the committee neither shall the deliberations ofthe conmuttee be invalidated because of the presence or absence of a person who is not responsible to the committee nor because ofthat person taking part in the deliberations of the conmuttee. 42 The Constitution of Zanzibar [R.E.200G] (4) The committee may regulate its own procedures. 61.(1) There shall be a Regional Commissioner for every region Regional of Zanzibar who shall be appointed by the President in consultation and District Commiswith the Union President. sioner. (2) There shall be a District Commissioner for every district in Zanzibar who shall be appointed by the President. (3) A Regional Commissioner or District Commissioner appointed pursuant to sub-articles (1) and (2) ofthis Article shall not assume office untilhe has subscribed an oath of allegiance and an oath ofthe due discharge of functions of his office. 62.(1) The Regional COnmllssioner or the District Commissioner Functions 1 lIb tI hi f . h b . fth' of RcO'ionai S la e ·le c e executIve as t e case may e ill respect 0 at regIOn and District or district. Commis(2) A Regional Commissioner or District Commissioner may \vithout prejudice to this Constitution or any other law, where he deems it fit delegate the powers ofthe Govermnent vested in the Regional Commissioner or District Commissioner in respect ofthe region or district as the case may be, to any person the Regional Commissioner or District Commissioner deems suitable, save that the powers to appoint Acting Regional or District Commissioner shall vest in tile President. 43 sioner.


===== PAGE 30 =====
fRE.20061 :--The Constitution of Zanzibar CHAPTER FIVE THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES PART ONE COMPOSITION OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES Legislative 63.(1) There shall be a Leaislative Council which shall consist of Council. b< two parts, the President of Zanzibar on one part and the House of Representatives on the other. (2) INhere any matter requires to be decided or done by both paris of the House of Representatives in accordance with the provisions of tIllS Constitution or of any other law, then that matter shall not have a force oflaw unless it is decided or done by both the members of the House of Representatives and also the President. Establish64. There shall be a House of Representatives which, without ment and . structure of prejudice to the provisions contained in this Constitution, shall consist House of of the following members: Representatives. (a) elected members pursuant to Arti~le 65 of this Constitution; (b) nominated members pursuant to Article 66 of this Constitution; (c) women members of the House of Representatives pursuant to Article 67 of this Constitution; (d) all Regional Commissioners appointed in the regions of Zanzibar pursuant to Article 61 of this Constitution; 44 The Constitution of Zanzibar [RE.2006J (e) the Attorney General pursuant to Article 55 (3) of tIlls Constitution. 65.(1) Zanzibar shall be demarcated into electoral constituencies Election pursuant to Article 120 of this Constitution and every constituency ~e~~~~:d shall elect one person to be member ofthe House ofRepresentati ves in a manner that shall be laid down by this Constitution or any other law. (2) Every person who has registered himself as a voter in a constituency for the purposes of electing a member unless that person has been lawfully detained or is by law disqualified to vote in the elections due to having been found to have committed an offence relating to elections or byway of being reported by the court that he committed an election offence or trying to nullify elections, that person shall be entitled to vote in that constituency in accordance with the law. (3) Voters registration and process ofthe elections for elected members shall be administered and managed by the Zanzibar Electoral Commission. 66. There shall be ten nominated members of the House of Nominated Representatives who shall be appointed by the President from amongst members. persons who upon nomination shall be qualified to be member ofthe House of Representatives. Except that not less than two members shall be appointed by the President in consultation with the opposition leader in the House of Representatives or in consultation with the political parties ifthere is no opposition leader. 45


===== PAGE 31 =====
[R.E.2006J The Constitution of Zanzibar Women 67.(1) There shall be female members of the House of members of the Representatives thirty percent (30%) in number of all elected members House of in electoral constituencies who are Zanzibaris and appointed by political Represen l3 - . . " lives. partIes represented 111 the House of RepresentatIves accordmg to the Act No. 2 provision of sub Article (2) of this Article. 012002 S 20. Qualification for election. (2) Every political party winning more than ten (l 0) percent of the constituencial seats in the House of Representatives shall recommend the names of women considering the provisions of the proportionality between the parties winning the election in the constituencies and get seats in the House of Representatives, and send names and their qualifications to the Chairman of the Zanzibar Electoral Commission. (3) The Zanzibar Electoral Commission after satisfying itself that a proposed woman is qualified to be a member of the House of Representatives pursuant to Article 68 of the Constitution, the Commission shall immediately declare that woman to be a membeI; of the House. It should be clear that in counting the members of every party, the part which is more than half of the member will be taken as full member. 68. A person shall be qualified to be a member of the House of Representatives if and shall not be qualified to be elected until his election on election day: (a) is a Zanzibali aged twenty one years; (b) is registered or is qualified to be registered in an election constituency as a voter in an election for members of the House of Representatives; 46 The Constitution of Zanzibar [R.E. 2006J (c) can read, but ifhe has an impaired vision or other physical infinnity is capable of speaking Kiswahi1i; (d) is a member and candidate proposed by a political party that has permanent registration in accordance with Political Parties RegistrationAct, 1992; (e) is a person who is not disqualified to contest elections pursuant to the provisions ofthis Article or pursuant to any law enacted by the House of Representatives. 69.(1) No person shall be elected as a member of House of ~isqualificaR "f h tIOn for epresentatIves 1 t at person: election. Act No. 2 (a) has the citizenship of any other country; or 01 2002 (b) the High Court has decided after consultation with mental health specialist that he has a mental disease; or (c) is not a member and candidate nominated by party; or (d) has been convicted of criminal offence and sent to the Educational Centre or Prison in the Mainland for the period of six months or more or for election offences regarding honesty during the period of five years before election. (2) A person shall not contest to become member ofthe House of Representatives ifhe is at that time Chairman of the Revolutionary Council. 47 S.22.


===== PAGE 32 =====
The Constitution of Zanzibar (3) The following regulations shall be applied for the pwposes of interpreting paragraph (d) of sub-article (1) of this Article, that is to say: (a) if a person is sentenced to two or more terms of imprisonment and sentences are to run concurrently, then those sentences shall be taken to be separate sentences in the case that none of them exceeds the period of six months, however, if the period in any one of those sentences exceeds the period of six months then all the separate sentences shall be taken to be one sentence; (b) where a person is sentenced to imprisonment in Educational Centre or prison and it is well known that imprisonment is in lieu of a fine or imprisonment has been imposed because that person failed to pay the fine imposed on him then such j ail term shall not be taken into consideration. (4) For the pwposes of intelpretation of the qualifications for election contained in the folIowingArtic1es wherever it is stated in tIlis Constitution tIlat tile implementation of any matter requires a person who has the qualifications for election or a person who has not been disqualified fi-om election then unless the context requires otherwise, it shall be understood that the qualifications concerned are those which enable a person to be elected a member offue House of Representatives or member ofthe Revolutionruy Council as leaders in the Revolutionary Govenmlent of Zanzibar as provided for in the different provisions of this Constitution runongst which are: 48 The Constitution of Zanzibar [R.E-200G] (a) it is prohibited for a leader to use public office for his personal gain, or in a manner that amounts to favoritism or in any way whatsoever that contravene the objective ofthe intended powers ofthat office; (b) it is prohibited for a leader to accept secret income, or bribes and corruption or to take part in any smuggling activity; and (c) where a leader has been dismissed from position of leadership shall not be eligible to apply for leadership position again until a period of five years has elapsed. 70. Every Representative member shall be required to take oath Oath of .. 'b d member of of allegiance in the House ofRepresentatlves as 1t shall be prescn e House of by the House of Representatives; however a Representative Member Representatives. may take part in the election ofthe Speaker even before he has taken oath. 71.(1) A Representative Member shall cease to be a Representative Member and shall vacate his seat in the House of Representatives upon the occurrence of any of the following: Tenure of office by members of the House of (a) Representawhere anything happens which, had he not been a tives. Representative Member, disqualified him from being a Representative Member or lose leadership qualifications; (b) where a Representative Member is elected President of Zanzibar; 49


===== PAGE 33 =====
[R.~. 2006j Cc) (d) (c) (f) (g) The Constitution of Zanzibar if a Representative Member without the Speaker's per-mission missed attending three consecutive meetings of the House of Representatives; where the House of Representatives is dissolved; where the High Court decrees that a Member loses his seat pursuant to Article 72 ofthis Constitution; where a Member in his own writing submits to the Speaker, his resignation from being a Member of the House of Representatives; where a Member ceases to be a member of the party that proposed him to stand for elections. (2) Speaker of the House of Representatives shall formally inform the House and the Chairman of the Zanzibar Electoral Commission regarding the vacancy of the seat of the Representative member pursuant to the provisions of sub-article (1) ofthis Article. (3) The House of Representatives may enact a law for the purposes of making provisions enabling a Member of the House of Representatives to appeal in accordance with the law, against a decision which confirms that his is a person of unsound mind, or against a sentence of death or imprisonment in Educational Centre or Prison and that law may provide that the decision appealed against by the member shall have no effect in law until the expiration of the period prescribed in that law. so _______ --..:7~·h~e....:C...:..o...:..ns...:..t...:..itl....:lt.:..:io.:..:n....:o~1.:::.Z.:..:a....:llz:.:..;ib:...:.a:.:..r ______ ~[R:...:.=.E. 2006J 72.(1) The High Court of Zanzibar shall have exclusive jurisdiction and authority to hear and determine all cases conceming the el ections in Zanzibar. (2) During the hearing of any case under this Article judge may appoint two experienced court assessors to assist him. 73. (1) There shall be a Speaker of the House ofRepresentati ves who shall be elected by Members of the House of Representatives from amongst persons who are members of the House of Representatives or who are qualified to be elected Member of the House of Representatives. (2) A Member of the Revol utionary Council Chief Minister, Minister, Deputy Minister, Regional Commissioner or a person holding office pursuant to any law enacted by the House of Representatives for the purposes ofthis Article, shall not be qualified to be elected as Speaker. (3) The Speaker shall cease to be Speaker and shall vacate the seat of Speaker upon the occurrence of any of the following events: (a) where that person was elected from amongst Members of the House of Representatives , he ceases to be a Member for any reason other than the dissolution ofthe House of Representatives; or (b) if anything happens which had he not been SpeakeI~ would disqualify such person from election, or make him lose qualifications for being elected Speaker; or 51 Determination whether a person is a member of the House of Representatives or not. The speaker.


===== PAGE 34 =====
[R.E.2._0_0_6~] _______ ~ ____ ~T~n~e~C~0~ns~tl~·tu~t~io~n~of~Z~an~z~ib~a~r ______________ _ The Deputy Speaker. (c) that person is removed from office of Speaker by a resolution of the House ofReprescntatives supported by not lcss than two thirds of all Member ofthe House of Representatives. (4) No business other than the election of the Speaker shall be conducted in the House of Representatives while the office ofthe Speaker is vacant save that tins sub-article shall not prevent committees ofthe House of Representatives from carrying out their functions. (5) Any person not being a Member of the House of Representatives, who is elected Speaker shall be required, before commencing to discharge the functions ofhis office to take and subscribe the oath of allegiance before the House of Representatives. 74.(1) There shall be a Deputy Speaker of the House of Representatives who shall be elected by the House of Representatives in accordance with the Standing Orders of the House who shall be a Represent::1.tive Member who shall not be the Chief Minister, Minister, Deputy Minister, Regional Commissioner or Member of the Revolutionary CounciL (2) The House of Representatives shall elect a Deputy Speaker: (a) pursuant to provisions of Article 73 (4) when the House of Representatives meets for the first time following dissolution of the House; and (b) at the first sitting of the House of Representatives after the office of Deputy Speaker becomes vacant for reasons other then dissolution of the House or as soon as possible. 52 The Constitution of Zanzibar [R.E.l006] (3) The office of Deputy Speaker shall become vacant: (a) if the House of Representatives meets for the first time since dissolution ofthe previous House; Cb) ifhe is appointed to be President or CruefMinister, or Minister, or Regional Commissioner or Member ofthe Revolutionary Council; (c) if he ceases to be a Member of the House of Representatives by reason other than dissolution of the House; or (d) ifby resolution supported bynot less than two thirds majority of all the Members, that the Deputy Speaker be removed from office. 75. The election of the Speaker or Deputy Speaker by Members of the House shall be by secret ballot. Procedure for election of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker. 76.(1) There shall be a Clerk of the House of Representatives Clerk of the House who shall be appointed by the President. 0 f Representa(2) The Office of the Clerk ofthe House of Representatives tives. and offices of other employees of that office shall be civil service ofthe Government. (3) The Clerk of the House of Representatives shall not assume office until he has subscribed and taken an oath of allegiance and such other oath as by law prescribed. 53


===== PAGE 35 =====
[RE.l006] The Constitution of Zanzibar Office of the House of Representatives. Power to legislate. 77.(1) There shall be office ofthe House of Representatives whose Chief Executive shall be the Clerk ofthe House of Representatives an d shall be responsible for matters as shall be authorised by House of Representatives Services Conunission. (2) There shall be a House of Representatives Services Commission which shall be responsible for engaging officers and such other employees of the House, promote them, take disciplinary measures and carry out any other functions as shall by law be described in service with the House, save that the Clerk of the House of Representatives shall be appointed by the President in accordance with Aliic1e 76 of the Constitution. (3) The structure and regulations of the House of Representatives Service Commission shall be as provided for in the law enacted in that behalf. (4) The House of Representatives may enact a law prescribing a system of administration and management and any other matters related to the office of the House of Representatives. PART TWO LEGISLATION PROCEDURE IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 78.( 1) Legislative power in relation to all matters that are not Union Matters in Zanzibar is hereby vested in the House of Representatives. (2) Without prejudice to the generality ofthe provisions in this Constitution, the legislative powers in the House of Representatives shall be by passing Bills in the House of Representatives. 54 _______ -=.:Th.:..:e_C:...:o:.;.ll:.:..st:.:;it:.::.u:.:.tio:.:.n.::.....o:.<.1-=Z::.::a:.:;"=zl:.:..·b=aI_· ______ -'fc....R_.E_,-. 2006] (3) Where a Bill is passed by the House of Representatives it shall be presented to the President for his assent. (4) V/here a Bill passed by the House of Representatives is presented to the President of Zanzibar and assented to, it shall become law and shall be printed in the Official Gazette. (5) 'TI1e House of Representatives may postpone to the coming into effect of a law enacted and without prejudice to the provisions of Article 12 of this Constitution may provide for a law to be retTospective. (6) A law enacted by the House of Representatives shall be known as "Enactment of the House of Representatives" and the citation shall be "Enacted by the House of Representatives ofZanzibar". 79.(1) After a Bill is presented to the President for his assent, the Legislative President may either assent to the Bill or withhold his assent and in the procedure. event the President withholds his assent to the Bill, he shall return it to the House of Representatives together with a statement of his reasons for withholding his assent to the Bill. (2) After a Bill is returned to the House of Representatives pursuant to the provisions ofthis Article it shall not be presented again to the President for his assent before the expiration of six months since it was so retumed except if at the last stage in the House of Representatives before it is again presented to the President it is suppolied by the votes of not less than two thirds of all Members of the House of Representatives. (3) lfa Bill is retumed to the House of Representatives by the President, and it is then supported in the House of Representatives by 55


===== PAGE 36 =====
[R.E.2006J The Constitution of Zanzibar Amendment of the Constitlltion. not less than two thirds of all Members ofthe House ofRepresenta1ives clS provided in sub-article (2) and it is presented a second time to the President for assent within six months of its being so returned, then the President shall be obliged to assent to the Bill within twenty-one days of its being presented to him, othelwise he shall have to dissolve the House of Representatives. (4) The provisions contained in this sub-article or in Article 79 (1) ofthis Constitution shall not prevent the House of Representatives from enacting a law providing for conditions for delegation of Govemment powers to make regulations that have force oflaw or giving legal force to any regulations made by any person or any department of the Govemment. 80.(1) Subject to the conditions of this Article, the House of Representatives may amend any Article of this Constitution. (2) A Bill in the House of Representatives to amend this Constitution shall not be passed by the House unless it is supported both at first and second reading by votes not less than two thirds of all votes of Members of the House of Representatives. (3) In this Article: (a) reference to this Constitution means reference to the Constitution as amended from time to time; (b) reference to amend tins Constitution means reference to amend, modification or enactment with amendment or modification in any Article of this Constitution to suspend or to repeal that Article and enactment of a new Article in the place of previous Article. 56 The Constitution of Zanzibar [R.E. 2006] 81. Every sitting of the House of Representatives shall be presided Presiding at SlttlllgS over by: of the (a) the Speaker; or (b) if the Speaker is absent, the Deputy Speakers; or (c) if the Speaker is absent and the Deputy Speaker is absent, another Member of the House of Representatives (who is not the Chief Minister, Minister, Deputy Minister, Member of the Revolutionary Council or Regional Commissioner) who shall be elected by Members of the House of Representatives in that behalf. House of Representatives. 82.(1) The House of Representatives may conduct business during Vacant its sittings notwithstanding any vacant seat in respect of a Member seats in tbe House of regarding seat that was left vacant when the House convened or was Representaconstituted for the first time and such business shall continue tives and . . procedure notwithstanding the presence of a person who IS not entItled to be to conduct present in the House or to vote in the House or to be present during business of the House the continuity of proceedings. 0 f Represen ta(2) Without prejudice to the conditions contained in Article 80 of lives. this Constitution, the quomm for Members to hold a meeting shall be one half of all Members of the House of Representatives. 83.(1) Unless the context requires otherwise in tills Constitution Voting in d .. . h H fR t t' 1 11 b d the House any matter or eClslOn 111 t e ouse 0 epresen a Ives s la e ma e 0 f by majority ofthe Members present and voting. Representatives. 57


===== PAGE 37 =====
[R.E.200G] The Constitution of Zanzibar Responsibility of the President in the House of Rcprescn latives. Committees of the House of Representatives. (2) Any matter brought before the House of Representatives for decision, the person presiding over the sitting of the House of Representatives. (a) if it be the Speaker, he shall have a casting vote and not a deliberative vote; (b) if it be not the Speaker, he shall have a casting vote as well as a deliberative vote; (3) The Standing Orders of the House of Representatives may make provisions for a voting Member who has an interest in a matter that comes for voting not to vote. 84. The President, in the discharge of his fimctions as President of the Revo 1 utionaIY Government of Zanzibar, may address the House of Representatives when he deems it fit to do so. 85.(1) There shall be Standing Committees ofthe House of Representatives which shall be constituted in accordance with Standing Orders of the House of Representatives. (2) For the purposes ofthis Article ofthis Constitution. the duties aIld fimctions ofthe committees of the House ofRepresentatlves shall be as provided for in the Standing Orders of the House of Representatives. (3) TIle House may establish various StaIlding Committees as it may deem fit. 58 The Constitution of Zanzibar [RE. 2006] 86.(1) The House of Representatives may for the purposes of The House to enact better discharge of its functions, enact a law in relation to lights, powers, law. immunities and privileges of Member and their committees on acceptable principle. (2) Subject to other conditions contained in this Constitution, the House of Representatives, may make Standing Orders of the House lay down procedures of conducting meetings taking into consideration laws enacted in accordance with sub-article (1) of this Article provide for rights, powers, privileges and immunities of Members in those Committees. (3) Members of the House of Representatives in the due discharge of their responsibility in the House and anywhere else: (a) shall have immunity from criminal charges or civil suits; (b) shall have immunity in respect of what they discuss; and (c) shall not be arrested in course of carrying out their responsibilities. 87.(1 ) Without prejudice to this Article, official language of the Officiai h b . ~t..;l· language. House of Representatives s all e KiSWdlll 1. (2) Any Bill (together with its attachments), evelY law enacted by the House, every substantive law or evelY law proposed under any institution by the House, finaIlcial transactions and any documents relating to any law or proposed law, amendment or continuing shall be written in Kiswallili and if necessary in English. 59


===== PAGE 38 =====
[R.E.200G] The Constitution of Zanzibar Functions of the House of Representatives. 88.(1) The House of Representatives, apart from deriving its functions from the provisions contained in this Constitution, shall also COl1cem itselfin the implementation ofthe following: (a) Cb) (c) (d) enact legislation where implementation ofthat matter requires legislation; debate the performance of each Ministry during the annual budget session in the House of Representatives; put different questions to the Revolutionary Government of Zanzibar in the House of Representatives; to approve and oversee development plans of the Government in similar marmer that Government budget is approved. PART THREE SUMMONING AND DISSOLUTION OF' THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES Summoning 89.(1) Without prejudice to the provision of this Article the session ~~c t~:ssiOIl of the House shall be in any part of Zanzibar and shall take place any House of time so ordered by the President. Representa.· (ives. Act No. 2 of 2002 S.24. (2) There shall be, at least once a year a session ofthe House of Representatives, and a period of twelve months shall not elapse between one session and another. 60 n I The Constitution of Zanzibar [R.E.200G] 1 . d' 1 d 1 1 t' f; General 90.(1) 'When t le House IS IS so ve ,genera e ec IOns or elections Members ofthe House of Representatives shall be held and the first and the session of the House shall be sWllilloned in not more than ninety days ;;ssstion . from the day the House was dissolved. Act No. 2 0/2002 . S. 25. (2) Without prejudice to the provisions ofthis Article a sittmg of the House of Representatives in any session ofthe House shall take place at any time and at any place in accordance with Standing Orders of the House. (3) If there is emergency or if there is an emergency which the President sees fit to summon a session ofthe House of Representatives and if at that time the House of Representatives has been dissolved and majority of the election results ofthe general election has not been declared, the President may issue a special notice of summoning a session of the House of Representatives and direct that the Speaker and all persons who were members ofthe House of Representatives soon before the House of Representatives was dissolved to attend that session and shall be so regarded until the mid-night ofthe day the majority of the election results of the general election are declared. 91.(1) The President may at any time summon the House of Summoning Representatives to continue with its fimctions. ~~~olution of the House of (2) The President shall not have power to dissolve the House Representaof Representatives at any time save only: tives. Ca) ifthe life of the House of Representatives has expired in temlS of Article 92 of the Constitution; or 61


===== PAGE 39 =====
[R.E. 200G] The Constitution 0/ Zanzibar (b) at any time within the last t\velve months ofthe life of the I-louse of Representatives for the purposes of calling an earlier general election; or (c) if the House of Representatives has refused to approve Govemment Budget; or (d) if the House of Representatives refuses to approve a Bill in tenus of Article 79 of the Constitution; or (e) if the House of Representatives declines to pass a motion which is of fundamental importance of Government policies and the President considers the way out in the National interest is not to dissolve cabinet or appoint a new Chief Minister but to call for a general election; or (f) ifhaving regard to the proportional representation of political parties in the House of Representatives, the President considers that it is no longer legitimate for the Government in power to continue in office, and it is not feasible to form a new Government. Save that the President shall not have the Power to dissolve the House of Representatives in terms ofparagraphs (b) (c) (e) and (f) ifthe Speaker receives a fOlmal notice under Article 37 of the Constitution proposing the fonnation of a Special Committee of Inquiry with a view to impeach the President. (3) Without prejudice to the provisions of the Constitution, the Speaker may Slllllillon the House of Representatives at any time on a matter of urgency afterreceiving proposal from a Member of the House 62 The Constitution 0/ Zanzibar [R.E. 2006J and the Speaker is satisfied that the reasons advanced in the proposal have a basis and that the House of Representatives should be summoned. 92.(1) The life of the House of Representatives shall continue for Life of period offive years from the date the first meeting was summoned House of after being constituted, save only in the event that the House of ~~~:esenta. Representatives is dissolved before expiration of its life due to reasons as prescribed in this Constitution. (2) During the period that Tanzania is at war, from time to time, the House of Representatives may extend beyond the prescribed five years period provided for in sub-article (1) ofthis Article for a period 110t exceeding six: months at anyone time of such extension. CHAPTER SIX THE JUDICIARY PART ONE THEHIGHTCOURT 93.(1) There shall be a High Court of Zanzibar which shall be a Establish· superior Court of record and which shall have unlimited jurisdiction on ffihenrtlofl . t e 'lg1 criminal and civil cases and other powers as may be conferred 111 Court accordance with this Constitution or any other law. (2) The Judges of the High Court shall comprise the Chief Justice and other Judges not less than two who shall be referred to as High Court Judges. (3) Not withstanding there being a vacancy in the seat ofa Judge of the High COUli, the High Court shall be legally constituted. 63


===== PAGE 40 =====
[R.E. 2006J The Constitution of Zanzibar Appointment of Judges of the High Court. Act No. 2 of 2002 s. 27. (4) 111e office of Judge shall not be annulled while there is a person holding that office. (5) The High Court shall hold its sittings at any place where the Chi ef Justice shall designate in that behalf 94.(1) The ChiefJustice shall be appointed by th~ Pre~ident from amongst judges of the High Court and after consultatIOn With the Judicial Service Commission. (2) Judges of the High Court s~a.ll be a~pointed ~y .the President on the recommendation of the JUdICial Semce Comnusslon. (3) Aperson shall not be appointed Judge or Actingjudge of the High Court unless: . ... (a) he holds a law degree from a recogmzed UnIVersIty or fiom a similar institution: (b) (i) (ii) he is or was ajudge ofa similar court to this court with civil and criminaljmisdiction in Tanzania or any other place in the Commonwealth or a court with appellate jUl1sdiction from those courts. he is an advocate of Zanzibar or Tanzania for a period of not less than seven years. (iii) he combines experience of (i) and (ii) above for not less than seven years. 64 The Constitution of Zanzibar [RE. 2006] (4) In the eventthatthe office ofaJudge is vacant or the Chief Justice is for any reason unable to perfonn the functions of his office, those fi.ll1ctions shall be pelfonned byone of the Judges who shall be appointed by the President for that pUlpose as Acting Chief Justice and that Judge so appointed shall perfonn those functions until a new Chief Justice is appointed and assume the functions of office ofthe Chief Justice or until the Chief Justice who was unable to perform his functions resumes office. (5) Where a Judge of the High Court is appointed Acting ChiefJustice or iffor any otherreason is unable to perfOlm the n.ll1ctions of a Judge or ifthe Chief Justice shall advise the President that in the state of affairs the High Court requires the services of another Judge the President in consultation with the Judicial Service Commission may appoint any person to be Judge of the High Court notwithstanding the prescribed age in terms of Article 95 (1) ofthis Constitution. (6) (a) The President may appoint any person to be Acting Judge of the High Court for the period not exceeding twelve months or Judge of the High Court by a contract of a particular period on recommendation of the Judicial Service Commission. (b) conditions of work , allowance and pension of the Judge appointed by a contract of a particular period shall be decided by the Judicial Service Commission. (7) Any person appointed in tenns of sub- article (5) to fill the vacancy of a Judge of the High Court shall continue in office, notwithstanding the conditions contained in sub-article (4) and (6) of Article 95, until that appointment is revoked by the President upon 65


===== PAGE 41 =====
[R.E. 2006J The Constitution of Zanzibar Tenure of office of judges. Act No. 2 of 2002 S. 28. 8dvice of the Judicial Service COIID1Jission and shall continue in office until he has completed the preparation and delivery o1'a decision or lmtil he completes any other thing which he has started hearing before himself (8) The Chief Justice shall not be removed from the seat of Chief Justice except for the reasons and procedure laid down for the removal of the Judge of the High Court according to Article 95 of this Cons titutiol1. 95.(1) Without prejudice to the provision of this Article the Jud~e ofthe High Court shall continue to hold his office until he reached the age ofsixiywhere he may voluntarily retire or continue until he reached the age of sixty-five where he shall be bound to retire. (2) Notwithstanding provisions of sub-article (1) of this Article the President may in consultation with Judicial Service Commission re-appoint a retired judge to hold the office of the High Court judge for a specified period or for a particular case. (3) lnspite of the fact that a Judge has attained the age prescribed in sub-article (1) above, a Judge of the High Court may continue in office to perform the functions of that office until he completes all fWlctions that engaged him before he attained that age. (4) A Judge of the High COlUt of Zanzibar may onlY,be rem~ved from office of a Judge by reason offailure to discharge hIS functIOns (or because of any other reason) or because of misbehaviour ~.d shall not be removed fiom office save in accordance with the prOVISIOns of this Article. 66 The Constitution of Zanzibar [R.E. 20061 (5) A Judge oftheHigh Court maybe removed fromoftlce by the President if the question ofremoval from office has been refeITed to special Commission appointed for that purpose under sub-article (6) of this Article and the Commission recommends to the President that Judge should be removed from office due to inability to discharge his function or due to grOlUlds of misbehaviour. (6) Where the President considers that the question of removal of the Chief Justice from office needs to be investigated, or where the Chief Justice submits to the President that a removal :from office of a Judge needs to be investigated: (a) (b) the President shall appoint a Chainnan and two members who are Judges or have held the office of Judges of the High Court of Zanzibar or the United Republic or an Appellate Court to the said High Courts; the Commission shall investigate the entire issue and shall report to the President of Zanzibar in respect of the whole issue and shall advise the President of Zanzibar whether the Judge in question should be removed from office due to failure to discharge the functions of his office in accordance with conditions contained in this Article arising out of illness or any other reason or on grounds of misbehaviour; (7) Where the question of removal of a Judge from office is refelTed to a Commission for investigationn accordance with this Artic1e, the President, upon consultation ,vith the Judicial Service Commission 67


===== PAGE 42 =====
[R.E. 20061 _______ T:_Z_le_C..:...o_n.....:s..:...ti.....:tu.....:tl:..::.·o..:.n.....:o~if.=Z..:...a:..:.:llz::.:..ib:..:a..:...r _ ______ _ Oaths to bc taken by judges of the High Court. Mcmbership in political parties. Repeal of Article 98. Ae! No. 2 of 2002 S. 29. in the case of a Judge of the High Court, or by his 0\\'11 proposal in the case of the ChiefJustice, may suspend thatJudge fi'omoffice and the suspension may at any time be revoked in the same manner as prescribed at the time of suspension from office and in any event the suspension from office shall cease to have any effect when the Commission recommends that the Judge in question should not be removed from office. (8) The Chief Justice or Judge ofthe High Court shall not be appointed or elected to perfonn other work in the Revolutionary government of Zanzibar or in any other place for any period without his consent in \YTiting. 96. AJ udge of the High Court shall not assume the functions of his office until he has first taken oath of allegiance and such other oath as may be prescribed by law enacted in that behalf. 97. It is hereby prohibited for a Judge of the High Court (including the Chief Justice), Magistrates of all grades Registrar, Acting Registrar, Deputy Registrar and Assistant Registrar and all Kadhis (together with the ChiefKadhi) to join any political party save only that he shall have the right to vote which is provided for inArtic1e 7 ofthis Constitution. PART THREE THE COURT OF APPEAL 98. Article 98 is repealed. 68 The Constitution of Zanzibar fR.E.2006) 99.( 1) The AppeIlate Court of the United Republic of Tanzania Recognition shall have the power of hearing appeal from the High Court of Zanzibar ~~ ~;r;a~urt except cases relating to: Act No. 2 of 2002 Function and Jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal. Act No. 2 of 2002 s. 30. Interpretation of the constitution to be sent to the High Court. Act No. 2 of 2002 S. 31. (a) Interpretation ofthis Constitution; (b) Matters ofIslamic law which begun at the Qadhi's Court; (c) any other matters mentioned in this Constitution or by any other law enacted by the House of Representatives. 99A.(1) In any suit before any court below the High Court if the question of interpretation of this Constitution appears that question shall immediately be referred to the High Court for the decision and the suit shall not proceed until the decision ofthe High Court is reached. (2) The appeal against the decision of the High Court on the question of interpretation of this Constitution shall be heard by three judges of the High COUli without including the judge who has decided that question on the first occasion. Those three judges shall be appointed by the Chief Justice. 69 S. 29.


===== PAGE 43 =====
__ rR....:~<,. 20061 The Constitution of Zanzibar Establishment of other courts. Act No.2o! 2002 S.32. PART THREE OTHER COURTS 100. The House of Representatives may establish other courts subordinate to the High Court and without prejudice to the provisions of this Constitution, those courts so established shall be vested with power and jurisdiction as shall be provided by law. PART FOUR PROCEDURE OF SERVING COURT ORDERS AND EXECUTING COURT DECREES Execution of court 101.(1) Documents containing court orders issued by courts in process Mainland Tanzania and courts in Zanzibar in cases of whatever civil to be done throughout nature and criminal matters of all kinds (including warrants of arrest) the entire may be served and may be executed in any place in Tanzania subject United t t1 C: 11' .. Republic of 0 le 10 owmgproVlslOnS: Tanzania. (a) in the event that a court has issued a document containing orders to be implemented in a place where that court has no jurisdiction; then that document shall be transmitted to the place where execution of the order is to take place and the orders in that document shall be carried out in accordance with the procedure obtaining in that place in respect of transmittal of documents or execution of orders contained in a document issued by a court vested with jurisdiction in respect of the place the document was transmitted; and 70 (b) The Constitutioll of Zanzibar [R.E. 2006J in the event the applicable law where a document is transmitted provides for conditions that documents issued by courts without jurisdiction where the documents or orders are to be executed required approval by a court that has jurisdiction over that area where that law is applicable, then every document issued by any court outside that jurisdiction shall have to be first certified by that court in accordance with the applicable law before the orders and directions contained in that document are executed. (2) Where a person is arrested in any place in Tanzania pursuant to a warrant of arrest issued by a court that has no jurisdiction where that person is arrested, that person shall be taken to be under lawful custody and may be produced before the court that issued the arrest warrant provided that the conditions contained in this Article shall be applied subject to procedure and government usage in respect of the place where that person is arrested. (3) T~e. provisions contained in this Article shall not bar any law fro~l provIdmg for procedure to enable service of court process emanatmg from the courts in Mainland Tanzania or courts in Zanzibar being served outside the borders of Tanzania. PART FIVE JUDICIAL SERVICE COMMISSION 'Dle Judicial Service 102.(1) There shaH be a Judicial Service Commission which Commission shall have the following Members : :f'2~~2 2 S.33. 71


===== PAGE 44 =====
7lze Constitutioll of Zanzibar -----(a) Chief Justice appointed by the President; (b) one judge of the High Court appointed by the President; (c) one retired Judge of the High Court or Appellate Court of Tanzania appointed by the President; (d) one advocate appointed by the President on recom~endation of the Zanzibar Law Society; ( e) Chainnan of the Civil Service Commission; (t) Attomey General; (g) ChiefQadhi; and (h) any other person whom the President sees fit. (2) No person shall be appointed under paragraphs (d) and (h) 0 fthis Article if he is a member of the House of Representatives or barred by the law enacted by the House of Representatives. (3) 111e member of the Judicial Service Commission shall not be removed except for reasons of misbehaviour or failure to discharge his duties because of physical or mental illness confirmed by the Board of Medical Practitioners constituted by not less than three qualified medical practitioners. (4) In carrying out its functions under tllis Constitution the Commission shall not be obliged to take into consideration any order or direction from any person. 72 The Constitution of Zanzibar [R.E. 2006J (5) The Commission may carry out its functions notwithstanding any vacancy in its members or the absence of some member, and its functions shall no be invalid just because of the presence and taking part in the proceedings of a person who should not take part in those proceedings. Provided that any decision of the Commission shall require the concurrence of a majority of all the members thereof. Powers of the judicial Service Commission. Act No. 2 of 2002 s. 34. 102A The Judicial Service Commission shall have the power to: (a) to advise the President on the appointmentofChiefJustice; and (b) recommend to the President on the appointment of judges of the High Court. 103.(1) The power to appoint persons to officer provided for in Appointment this Article (including power to confinn and take disciplinary action in of Judicial Officers. respect of person in those positions), shall vest in the Judicial Service Act No. 2 Commission. of 2002 s. 35. Provided the Chief Justice shall not be a Chaimlan on any disciplinarymeeiing, and the members of the Commission shall appoint one among them as a Chainnan. (2) The offices to which tIlis sub article applies are: (a) office ofthe Registrar and Deputy Registrar of the High court; 73


===== PAGE 45 =====
[R.E. 2006J The Constitution of Zanzibar (b) office of the Regional Magistrate and District Magistrate; (c) office of any subordinate court Magistrate that has jurisdiction for criminal matters; (d) office of Kadhi; (e) all other offices of Members of the Court or related to the COUli as may be prescribed by the House of Representatives. (3) Judicial Service Commission shall have the power of recOlmnending salaries, allowances and pensions for the Judges and Magistrates. (4) Chief Justice shall have the power of transferring Magistrates and any Magistrate aggrieved shall have the right of appeal to the Judicial Service Commission. (5) The House of Representatives may enact laws on the following matters: (a) meeting procedures of the Judicial Service Commission; and (b) allowances and other gratuities of the members of the Commission; and (c) other matters relating to the Judicial Service Commission. 74 ________________ n_1e_C_o_n_s_ti_tu_ti_Ol_l~of_Z~a_n_zl~"b_al_" ____________ ~[R~.E.~~ CHAPTER SEVEN PART ONE FINANCE PROVISIONS REGARDING THE FINANCES OF THE REVOLUTIONARY GOVERNMENT OI~ ZANZIBAR 104.(1) 111ere shall be a Consolidated Fund ofthe Revolutionary Consolidated G t fZ 'b h" h W' h " d" 1 1 Fund and OVenlillen 0 ~anzl ar W IC, It out preJu ICe to any ot ler aw other applicable shall be paid all revenue derived from various sources for ~~~anccs of the use of the Revolutionary Govemment of Zanzibar for: Revolutionary (a) payment into a fund ofthe Government (other than Governm en! of the Consolidated Fund) which shall be for special Zanzibar. use,or (b) depositing, by the Revolutionary Government of Zanzibar, into different banks within the country and outside the country for the purposes of settling payments of expenditures of the Revolutionary Government of Zanzibar. (2) It is hereby declared that funds shall not be withdrawn from that fund unless the withdrawal is authorized by the Revolutionary Govemment of Zanzibar or by law enacted by the House of Representatives in that behalf 105.(1) The Minister responsible for finance shall prepare The budget. estimates for Government expenditure for the following year and submit them to the House of Representatives. 75


===== PAGE 46 =====
___ rR.~.2006J ____________ ~T.~h~e~C~o~n=st~it~u_ti~oJ~I~of~Z_a_n_z_ib_a_r __________ ___ (2) The budget estimates shall indicate different expenditures as required by law (as defined in sub-article (3) of Article 106 and other ordinary expenditures that require withdrawal from the Consolidated Fund. A u Ih ori sa 106.(1) Every beginning of Financial year as soon as is practicable, lion °d f tile Minister responsible for finance shall submit to the House of cxpcn Ilure . out of the Representatives, a Bill for authorization of Government ExpendIture ConsolIdated d'f~ fu' . d t b dertaken Fund by with relevant heads for 1 lerent nctlOns reqUIre 0 e un Appropria- togethenvith the total sum of the fmances for the pruticular expenditure lion Act. b 1 . d fi th t not forgetting expenditure as y aw reqUITe or a year. (2) In the event: (a) (b) that finances expended or which are about to be spent in any fmancial year for certain purposes exceed the sums authorized in the Appropriation Act for that year; or that finances spent or that are about to be spent (excluding expenditures that have to be met in accordance with the law) for any financial year and for any purpose whatsoever and the finances. w~re not authorized to be expended by the AppropnatlOn Act for that year; Statement of excess expenditure, or supplementary estimates as the case may be, shall be submitted to the House of Representatives for approval of the supplementary estimates or the statement of excess 76 The COllstitution of Zanzibar expenditure, a Bill for authorization Government expenditure from the Consolidated FlU1d shall be introduced in the House of Representatives ruld that the fimds shall be utilized to pay for costs of the flll1ctions related to the estimates or statement. (3) For the purpose of this Article and following Articles "Expenditure by law required" means: (a) expenditure from the Consolidated Fund or from revenues of the nation pursuant to provisions of any other applicable law; (b) Interest in respect of national debt, finances deposited for payment of debt and all costs related to management of that debt. 107.(1) No payment shall be made out ofthe Consolidate Fund Payn save upon the Ministerresponsible for Finance issuing special document ~~ t~~ in respect ofthe expenditure. of a (2) Without prejUdice to the provisions of Article 108, no authority shall be given except in respect of expenditure authorized in the annual Appropriation Act or in respect of statement of excess or in respect of supplementary budget as authorised by the House of Representatives in terms of Article 106(2) or in respect offunctions which by law payments are made from the Consolidated Fund. spcci, doeUll 108.(1) 11le House of Representatives may enact a law establishing Expend a contingencies fund and authorise tile Ministerresponsible for finance, from 1 . fiedtI th· . . ContlI1f W lere satis lat ere eXiSts a grave contmgencyreqmring expenditure ney Fun to which there are no legal means in that behalf, for that purpose to withdraw funds fi'om that fund. 77


===== PAGE 47 =====
[R.E.2006] The Constitution of Zanzibar (2) V/here funds have been dra\vn from the contingence fund, supplementary estimates shall be submitted to the House of Representatives for the pUIposes of voting back the moneys so expended. Authofciza109.(1) Where the financial year has started and the relevant tlOn 0 expenditure Appropriation Act in respect ofGovemment expenditure for that year ~~ advance is yet to be applicable then the President of Zanzibar may authorise appropriamoneys to be issued from the Consolidated Fund for the purposes of lion Act. paying for necessary costs of Government nmctions, arld the fund shall be used for a period not exceeding three months from the begin.ning of the financial year or UIltil the Government Appropriation Act comes into effect. Depending on which one ofthe two proceeds the other. (2) On condition that the authorization for that period shall not exceed one quarter ofthe moneys appropriated in the Consolidated Fund by the House of Representatives for the previous financial year, but also on condition that the moneys shall in total sum be appropriated into relevant heads in the ensuing Appropriation Act. Public debt 110.(1) The public debt ofthe Revolutionary Government of of the RevolutioZanzibar shall be secured on the Consolidated Fund of the nary Revolutionary Government of Zanzibar. Govemment of Zanzibar. (2) For the purposes of interpretation of this Article "the public debt of the Revolutionary Government of Zanzibar" mearls the principal debt itself and also the interest char'ged on it, sinking fund payments in respect of that debt and the costs incidental to the management ofthat debt. 78 The Constitution of Zanzibar 111.(1) Holders of public office to whom the provisions of this RernuncraArticle apply shall be paid salaries and allowaIlces as shall be prescribed tiOl t 1 of eer 81n by a law enacted by the House of Representatives. officers. Act No. 2 of 2002 (2) The salaries and allowance payable to holders of offices S 36. to whom the provisions ofthisArtic1e apply together with pension and gratuity for those entitled to such payments shall be a charge on the Consolidated FUlld. (3) The salary payable to the holder of a public office to whom the provisions ofthis Article apply together with his temlS and conditions of service, (apart from gratuity and allowances calculated in relation to his pension) shall not be varied in a manner which is 1 ess beneficial to him. (4) When a person's salary or other terms of service depend upon his option, the salary or terms for which he opts shall, for the purposes of sub-article (3) of this Article, be deemed to be more advaIltageous to him tharl other for which he might have opted. (5) This Artic1e shall apply to the Chief Minister, Speaker, OliefJustice, Judges of the High COlUl, OliefQaclbi, Justices of Appeal, Member of the Civil Service Commission, the Attomey-General, Director of Public Prosecutions and Controller and Auditor General of ZarlZibar: 112.(1) There shall be a Controller and Auditor General of the Controller Revolutionary Government of Zanzibar who shall be appointed by the ~:dditor_ President. General of Zanzibar. 79


===== PAGE 48 =====
[R.E. 2006] The Constitution of Zanzibar (2) A person shall not be appoint Controller and Auditor General unless he has the following qualifications: (a) a recognized university degree in Ii1atters related to auditing of accounts; or (b) other diploma certificates of auditing of accounts; and (c) other courses related to such subj ect which are acquired after obtaining one of the degrees mentioned in sub-article (2)( a) ofthis Article and has held office in related matters for a period of not less than five years. (3) The Controller and Auditor-General shall be responsible for the following: (a) Cb) to ensure that the use of any moneys proposed to be paid out of the Consolidated Fund of the Revolutionary Govenunent of Zanzibar has been authorized in accordance with the law and ifhe is satisfied that those conditions have been properly complied with then he shall authorize payment of such moneys. to ensure that all the moneys the payment of which has been authorized for use, the issue is from the Consolidated Fund of the Revolutionary Government or moneys whose use is authorized by law enacted by the House of Representatives 80 The Constitution of Zanzibar [R.E. 2006J and that the moneys have been spent on matters related to the use of the moneys in respect of the use of that money and that the expenditure has complied with the authority given in respect of such expenditure; and (c) at least once a year to conduct audit and give an audit reporting respect of the accounts of the Revolutionary Government of Zanzibar, the accounts managed by all officers of the Revolutionary Government of Zanzibar, the accounts of all courts in Zanzibar, the accounts of Commissions or other organs established by this Constitution and the accounts related to the House of Representatives. (4) The Controller and Auditor General and every servant of the Revolutionary Government of Zanzibar authorized by the Controller and Auditor General shall have the right to examine books, records, statements of accounts, reports and all other documents concerning any type of account referred to in sub-article (3) ofthis Article. (5) The Controller and Auditor General shall submit to the President every report he makes pursuant to the provision of subarticle (3) (c) ofthisArtic1e. Upon receipt of such repOli, the President shall direct the persons concemed to submit that report before the fIrst sitting of the House of Representatives which shall be held after the President has recei ved the repOli and it shall have to be submitted to such sitting before the expiration of seven days from the day the sitting ofthe House of Representatives begarl. If the President does not take steps of submitting such report to the House of Representatives, then 81


===== PAGE 49 =====
I I ~ ~Il >. [R.E.2006] The Constitution of Zanzibar Removal from office of the Controller and AudilorGeneral. the Controller and Auditor General shall submit the report to the Speaker of the House of Representatives or the Deputy Speaker who shall submit the report to the House of Representatives. (6) The Controller and Auditor General shall also have responsibility of discharging other functions, and shall have other various powers as shall be specified by the law concerning the accounts oft~e Revolutionary Govemment of Zanzibar or the accounts of other publIc cOlporations and bodies of Zanzibar. (7) In the discharge of his functions in accordance with the provisions of sub-articles (3), (4) and (5) ofthisArticle: the Controller and Auditor General shall not be obliged to comply wlth the order or direction of any other person, or Government Department, but the provisions of this sub-article shall not preclude a comt fr0n: exercising jurisdiction to enquire into whether the Controller andAu~:or Gener~l has discharged his functions in accordance with the provlsIOns of this Constitution or not. (8) The Controller and Auditor General shall not assume office until he has subscribed and taken oath of allegiance and such other oath for due discharge of his functions as shall be prescribed by the House of Representatives. 113.(1) The Controller and Auditor Ge~eral ma~be :em~ved from office only for inability to perform the functIOns oflus office (eIther due to illness or to any other reason) or for misbehavior and 8ha1111ot be removed from office except in accordance with the provisions ~f sub-atticle (3) of this Article otherwise he shall continue in office untll he attains the age of retirement as shall be prescribed by law enacted in that behalfbythe House of Representatives. 82 ,------ -----------=-=----The Constitution of Zanzibar [R.E. 2006J (2) If the question ofthe removal ofthe Controller at1dAuditor General from office under the provisions ofthis Article needs to be investigated, then the foUmvingprocedure shall be observed: (a) the President shall appoint a special Commission which shall consist of the Chairman and other members who shall be not less than two; (b) the Commission shall investigate and submit a repolt to the President on the whole matter and shall advise the President whether the Controller and Auditor General should be removed from office in accordance with the provisions ofthis Alticle on the grounds ofinabilitytoperfonnfunctions ofms office due to illness or any other reason or on grounds of misbehavior. (3) lfthe Commission appointed in accordance with the provisions of sub-article (2) ofthis Article advises the President that the Controller and Auditor General be removed from office on grounds of inability to perfonn functions of his office due to illness or any other reason or on grounds ofmisbehavior, then the President shall remove him from office. (4) If the Commission advises the President that the Controller and Auditor General should not be removed from ofiice, the President mayor may not agree with the advice given and the President shall then use his own prudence. (5) Aperson who holds or who has held the office of Controller and Auditor General shall not be appointed to, or act in any other office in the service of the Revolutionary Govemment of Zanzibar. 83


===== PAGE 50 =====
[R.E.2006J The Constitution of Zanzibar Union Contribution. Po';;:ers ~() expend the allocation. Civil Service Commission. PART T\VO FINANCIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO UNION MATTERS 114. All the moneys that are part of the Union contribution which is the responsibility ofthe Revolutionary Govelnment of Zanzibar to pay, shall be on the Consolidated Fund. 115. Moneys shall not be expended in this part until: (a) the Joint Finance Commission in relation to Union Matters as established by the Union Constitution has analysed the revenue and expenditure relating to affairs of the Union and make its recommendations to relevant institution on the allocation of the expenditure; and (b) the Revol utionary Govenmlent of Zanzibar agrees with the said recommendations and allocation. CHAPTER EIGHT CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION 116.(1) There shall be a Civil Service Commission of the Revolutionary Govelnment of Zanzibar which shall comprise of the Chaimwn, Vice Chainnarl arId five other members. (2) 'nIe Chailman and members ofthe Commission shall be appointed by the President. 84 ________ Th-.:e:....C~0_'..:.ls.:....ti:..:.:tu:....ti~o,:....120f:....Z::.:a.:....l1:::.z..:.ib_a_r ______ --..:[RE. 2006J 117.(1) A person shall not be qualified to be a member ofthe Appointment and Civil Service Commission if: termination of a (a) is a Minister or Member of the Revolutionary mhemcber,of t e IVI Council; Service vacant: (b) is a Deputy Minister; (c) is a Member of the House of Representatives; (cl) is a civil servant. (2) The office of a Member ofthe Commission shall be (a) after the expiration ofthree years from the date he was appointed; (b) in the event there occurs anything which if a person that occupies office as member would be disqualified as a Member, then he would not have been qualified to be member of the Commission. However it is hereby declared that such Member may be reappointed for arIotherperiod ofthree years and not more. (3) A Member of the Commission may be removed from office due to his failure to perform the duties entrusted to him (arising out of either physical or mental infinnity or for any other reason) or because of indiscipline arld shall not be removed from office save in accordance with the conditions ofthis Article. 85 Corrunissian.


===== PAGE 51 =====
[R.E.2006) The Constitution of Zanzibar ~----------~~~==~~~~------------(4) A Member ofthe COll1lnission shall be removed from office by the President if the question of his removal shall be refen-ed to a Commission and the Commission recommends to the President that the Member should be removed due to inability to perform his functions as described hereinabove. (5) If the President thinks the question of removal of a Member should be investigated then: (a) the President shall appoint a Special Conunission having a Chairman and other Members who shall be not less than two from amongst persons who hold or held positions ofJudges of a court that has jurisdiction over cases of any kind in Tanzania or Judge of Court of Appeal which court has appellate jurisdiction from the said courts; and (b) the Commission shall investigate the whole matter and shall report to the President whether the Member should be removed or not. (6) If the question of removal of a Member is referred to a Special Commission for investigation, the President may suspend the Member from office and the suspension may be revoked by the President at any time, and in any case the suspension shall be of no effect whatsoever in the case where the COll1lnission recommends that the Member should not be removed from his position of responsibility. (7) If the office of the Chairman is vacant, or in the event the Chairman, due to any reason whatsoever is unable to perfonn his functions then until such a time a person is appointed to perform the 86 The Constitution of Zanzibar [R.E.200G] functions of the Chainnan and has embarked on canying out the nll1ctions of the Chairman or up to when the Chairman shall be able to resumed the functions of his office as the case may be, the Deputy Chaitman or in the event the office of the Deputy Chairman is vacant or due to any reasons whatsoever the DeputyOlaitman can not perfoIDl the functions of the Chaimlan any other Member appointed by the President may pert)rm the nmctions of the Chairman or any other Member shall continue to hold that office not\vithstandingthe provisions of sub-articles (2), (4) and (5) as the case may be until the Chainnan resumes his functions. (8) Ifthe office of a Member ofthe Commission, save that ofhe Chairman is vacant or if a Member is acting as Chairman under sub-article (7) ofthisArtic1e or for whateverreason is unable to perform his functions, the President may appoint another suitable person to fill the vacancy for the time being and the person so appointed shall continue in that position without prejudice to conditions provided for in submiicIes (2), (4) and (5) ofthis Article until such time the substantive member resumes the functions of his office. (9) TIle Conmnssion, without prejudice to provisions in this Constitution shall, in the performance ofits functions, not be obliged to follow any orders or directions from any person. (10) The Commission, pursuant to its regulations, may conduct its functions despite the absence or vacancy in the office of a Member mId its functions shall not be invalidated because of the presence of a person who should not have been present. Provided that any decision ofthe Commission shall have to be by a majority of not less than two thirds of all the Members. 87


===== PAGE 52 =====
(R.E.200G! The Constitution of Zanzibar Appointment of Civil Scrvan ts. Zanzibar 118.(1) \Vithout prejudice to the provisions of this Constitution, the power to appoint persons to responsible positions in the Government (together powers to confirm them in office), power to punish in disciplined officer in their positions mld the powerto remove them from their responsibilities shall vest in the Civil Service Commission. (2) Without prejudice to the provisions of this Arlic1e together \vith sub-article (9) of Article 117, the House of Representatives may enact a law providing for procedure to be followed by the Commission under this Article and all other matters related to those functions. (3) No person shall be appointed in terms of this Article to perfol1n any function in the office of the President without first obtaining pennission fi:om tile following offices: (a) offices of Principal Representatives of Zanzibar in any other country; (b) any other office in service with the functions of the Government the appointment to which is prescribed bylaw. CHAPTER NINE ZANZIBAR ELECTORAL COMMISSION Electoral 119.(1) There shall be a Zanzibar Electoral Commission which Conunission. shall have the following Members: Act No. 2 of 2002 S 37. Act No. 8 of 2002 S. 4. (a) the Chainnan appointed by the President in the marmer deems fit; 88 (b) (c) The Constitution of Zanzibar [R.E. 2006J two members appointed by the President on the recommendation of the Leader of government business in the House of Representatives. two members appointed by the President on the recommendation of the Opposition Leader in the House of Representatives or if there is no opposition leader by consultation with the political parties. (d) one member appointed by the President from mnong the judges of the High Court. (e) one member appointed by the President as he sees fit. (2) (a) The Chairman of the Zanzibar Electoral Commission shall be a person with qualification to be ajudge of High Court or Court of Appeal of any member Country of the Commonwealth or a respected person in the society. Cb) The Zanzibar Electoral Commission shall appoint a Vice-Chairman from among its members. (3) TIle following persons shall not be appointed as Members ofthe Zanzibar Electoral Commission: (a) Minister or Deputy Minister; (b) Member of the House of Representatives, or a Member of the armed forces of Tanzania or 89


===== PAGE 53 =====
I I I ~ I I [R.E.2006] The Constitution of Zanzibar Appoi n (men t of Civil Servants. Zanzibar 118.(1) Without prejudice to the provisions of tIlis Constitution, the power to appoint persons to responsible positions in the Government (together powers to confinn them in office), power to punish in disciplined officer in their positions and the power to remove them ft'om their responsibilities shall vest in the Civil Service Commission. (2) ·Without prejudice to the provisions oftllisArticle together with sub-article (9) ofArtic1e 117, the House of Representatives may enact a law providing for procedure to be followed by the Commission under this Altic1e and all other matters related to those functions. (3) No person shall be appointed in tenns oftrus Article to perfoiln any function in the office of the President without first obtaining pemlission £i'om the following offices: (a) offices ofPrincipaI Representatives of Zanzibar in any other country; (b) any other office in service with the functions of the Government the appointment to wruch is prescribed bylaw. CHAPTER NINE ZANZIBAR ELECTORAL COMMISSION Electoral 119.(1) There shall be a Zanzibar Electoral Commission which Commissioll. shall have the following Members: Act No. 2 0/2002 S. 37. Act No. 8 0/2002 S.4. Ca) the Chainnan appointed by the President in the manner deems fit; 88 The Constitution of Zanzibar [R.E.2006J (b) two members appointed by the President on the recommendation of the Leader of government business in the House of Representatives. (c) two members appointed by the President on the recommendation of the Opposition Leader in the House of Representatives or if there is no opposition leader by consultation with the political patties. (d) one member appointed by the President from among the judges ofthe High Court. ( e) one member appointed by the President as he sees fit. (2) (a) The Chairman of the Zanzibar Electoral Commission shall be a person with qualification to be ajudge of High Court or COUli of Appeal of any member Country ofthe Commonwealth or a respected person in the society. (b) The Zanzibar Electoral Commission shall appoint a Vice-Chainnan from among its members. (3) The following persons shall not be appointed as Members of the Zanzibar Electoral Commission: (a) Minister or Deputy Minister; (b) Member of the House of Representatives, or a Member of the anned forces of Tanzania or 89


===== PAGE 54 =====
I I [R.E. 2006J The Constitution of Zanzibar occupies a position which in law does not pennit him to be Member of the Commission. (c) a Member of Parliament or any other person in position of responsibility referred to in any law enacted by Parliament in tem1S of the conditions in paragraph (9) of sub-article (2) of article 67 of the Union Constitution. (d) a leader of any political party. (4) Without prejudice to other provisions in this Article a Member of the Zanzibar Electoral Commission shall cease to be Member on occurrence of any ofthe following: (a) upon expiration ofa period offive years since he was appointed; or Cb) upon occurrence of any event if he were not member of the Commission, would have rendered him not to be appointed Member of the Zanzibar Electoral Connnission. (5) 1he President may only remove a Member of the Zanzibar Electoral Commission for failure to perfonnhis functions, either because of illness or for any other reason or because of misbehavior or due to disqualification to be a member. (6) A member ofthe Commission shall be removed from office by the President ifthe question of his removal from office is refened to a Special Commission established in that behalfin terms of 90 ________ T.:..:.i.:.,::ze...,:C:::.:°::..:..fl:::.:.s::.::tit:::u.::ti°:::.:,.:.-z ~of~Z~a::.:.ll~zl:::.:.·b:::ar~ ______ [RE. 2( sub-article (7) of this Article and the Commission recommends to the President that the Member should be removed due to his inability to perfoml his functions as described hereinabove. (7) In the event the President thinks the question of removal of a M ember oft he Commission should be investigated then: (a) the President shall appoint a Special Conunission with a Chairman and not less then two other Members from persons holding or who held positions of Judges of Courts of unlimited jurisdiction in Tanzania, or Justice of Appeal the Appellate court havingjurisdiction over the other courts, and Cb) the Commission shall investigate the issue and recommend to the President whether the Member should be removed or not. (8) Wl1ere the question of removal of a Member is refened to a Special Commission for investigation the President may suspend the Member from duty and the suspension may at any time be revoked by the President and in any case the suspension shall have no effect whatsoever where the Conunission recommends to the President that the Member should not be removed from office. (9) For better canying out of its functions, the Electoral Commission shall be an autonomous department and its ChiefExecuiive shall be Director of Elections who shall be appointed and perfonn his fUllctions as provided for by law enacted by the House of Representatives. 91


===== PAGE 55 =====
I I I ~ I I ~ ~ ~ [R.E.20061 The Constitution of Zanzibar Constituencies. (10) 111e quorum of the Commission is the Chainnan or Vice Chairman and four members and every decision of the Commission shall be supported by the majorityofthe members of the Commission. (11) The House of Representatives may enact a law providing for conditions for making procedures of appointing Members to oversee Presidential Elections, Members of the House of Representatives and Coul1cillors and without prejudice to legal conditions of similar nature or directions of the Electoral Commission to oversee the elections may be carried out by the Members. (12) In the performance of its flUlctions pursuant to conditions of this Constitution, the Electoral Commission shall not be obliged to follow any orders or directions from any person or any department of the Government or the opinion of a political party. (13) No court shall have jurisdiction to enquire into anything done by the Zanzibar Electoral Commission in the perfonnance of its functions in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution. (14) In the perfolmance of it functions in accordance with this Constitution the Zanzibar Electoral Commission shall from time to time consult with the National Electoral Commission of the United RepUblic. 120.(1) Without prejudice to the conditions contained in the provisions of this Article Zanzibar may be divided into election constituencies with names and bOlUldaries as shall be described by the Commission. 92 The Constitution of Zanzibar [R.E ----------~~~~~==~------~ (2) TIle House of Representatives may by law fix the mininllll1 nwnber of election constituencies being not less than 40 and the ma'cimum numbernotexceeding 55. (3) All the constituencies shall as far as possible have an equal number of residents as the Commission may detelmine, however the Commission may dispense with this condition to the extent deemed appropriate taking into consideration: (a) (b) (c) the size of the population particularly ensuring appropriate representation in urban areas and towns in rural areas thinly populated; population growth; the means of communication; (d) ,administrative demarcations and for the purposes of this Article the number of inhabitants in any part of Zanzibar shall be ascertained by the latest census report conducted in accordance with the law. (4) Within a period of between 8 and 10 years, or any other time the House of Representatives decides so to do, the Commission shall review the number of election constituencies boundaries and their names to the extent it deems fit to review; and may, by notice change the number, boundaries and the names of the constituencies. (5) Where a population census has been conducted in accordance with the law, or if administrative boundaries have been made in any area thereof, the Commission may investigate the situation and treat the changed situation to the extent which the Commission thinks fit to effect the change. 93


===== PAGE 56 =====
[R.E. 2(l~.:.':/O~GLJ ______ ~1:.:.71.=.e...::C:.:::o.:.::llS::.:·t:::itu::.:t..:::::io:.:.:n_.::o':!....1...::Z::.:an:.:.:z:..:.:ib::..::a:.:...r _______ _ (6) Any order made by the Cormnission in telms of this Article shall be gazetted and shall come into effect on the date it is published in the Gazette. CHAPTER TEN SPECIAL DEPARTMENTS Special 121.(1) There shall be Special Departments of the Revolutionary Departments. Government of Zanzibar whose duties and functions shall be as presclibed in relevant laws. (2) The Special Departments referred to above are: (a) Economic Development Force (in short JKU); (b) Special Force for Prevention of Smuggling (in short KMKM); (c) Educational Center for offenders (Chuo cha Mafunzo). (3) The President of Zanzibar may when he deems it fit establish any other department and designate it special department. (4) Any person in service with the Special Departments of the Revolutionary Govemment of Zanzibar is prohibited from taking part in political activities except voting in any election in accordance with the provisions of Article 7 of the Constitution. Special 122. There shall be Special Departments Service Commission Departmcnts' Scrvice whose powers, authority, functions and regulations of its procedures Commission. shall be as provided for in a law enacted by the House of Representatives in that behalf 94 .- ,'--"" ,," , The Constitution of Zanzibar (R.E. 123.(1) The President shall be the Commander-in-chief ofthe ; Special Departments and shall have the powers to do anything he sees ~ fit so to do in the interest of the Nation. 0 L (2) The powers ofthe President under sub-article (1) ofthis Article include the power to order anything to be done in respect of a Special Department in the interest ofthe nation. CHAPTER ELEVEN JURISDICTION OF CERTAIN INSTITUTIONS OF THE UNION 124.(1) The institutions provided for in sub-article (2) of this Th Co Article and in accordance \Vith their establishment pursuant to provisions om ofarticles ofthe Union Constitution shall be authorized to perfolm Pe! their functions in Zanzibar in tenns of the procedure stipulated in the ~~l Union Constitution and any other law either enacted by Parliament or En( the House of Representatives in that behalf ~~~ E1e (2) The institutions referTed to in sub-article (1) are: CO! sior (a) TIle Constitutional Court of the United Republic; app Zan Cb) TIle Pennanent Commission of Enquiry; (c) National Electoral Commission of the United Republic. (3) For the purposes ofthisArtic1e, the institutions refened to in sub-article (2) of this Article shall be construed as institutions of the Revolutionary Govemment in the performance of their functions in Zanzibar. 95


===== PAGE 57 =====
I I ~ ~ I I I I I '·' , , " I [R.E. 2006J The Constitution of Zanzibar Planning Commission. CHAPTER TWELVE OTHER INSTITUTIONS OF THE REVOLUTIONARY GOVERNMENT OF ZANZIBAR PART ONE PLANNING COMMISSION 125.(1) There shall be a Planning Commission ofthe Revol utionary Govemment of Zanzibar which shall be the highest institution tor planning and shall supervise the implementation of economic development and social services planning in Zanzibar. (2) The procedure forperformance of the duties and functions of the Planning Commission and matters related to Members of the Commission shall be as provided in the law enacted by the House of Representatives. Members of the 126. Members ofthe Planning COlmmssion and regulations of Commission. meetings shall be in accordance with the law enacted by the House of Representati ves. ;oe~~e:ary 12 7; There shall be Secretary to the Planning Commission who Planning shall be appointed by the President. Commission. PART T\VO LOCAL GOVERNMENT AUTHORITIES Local 128.(1) There shall be Local GovemmentAuthorities for every Government Region, District and Area in respect of the Region or District or Area Autontlcs. ' as the case may be. 96 ----------_ ........ _---- .,-------_._---------The Constitution of Zanzibar [R.E (2) Appointment of Members, powers and functions of every Local GovernmentAuthorities shall be as prescribed by law enacted by the House of Representatives . CHAPTER THIRTEEN GERNERAL PROVISIONS 129.(1) Without prejudice to the provisions ofthis Article, any I person who is mentioned, elected or appointed to hold any position provided for in this Constitution, may resign his position by submitting in his own hand writing resignation notice to the person who nominated, elected or appointed him. (2) A person who gives notice of resignation in tenns ofthe conditions contained in sub-article (1) of this Article shall be taken to have resigned his position from the date his resignation notice is received by the person permitted to receive that notice by a responsible person in an appropliate sitting however if the resignation notice relates to a future date that person shall be taken to have resigned with effect iiom that future date. (3) Notice of resignation of the President shall be submitted to the Chief Justice who shall submit it to the Chainnan of Zanzibar Electoral Commission. (4) Notice of resignation of the Chief Minister shall be submitted to the President. (5) Notice of resignation ofthe Speaker or Deputy Speaker of the House of Representatives shall be submitted to the House of Representatives. 97


===== PAGE 58 =====
[TCE.2006J The Constitution of Zanzibar ------------------------~---------------------New appointment and notification of termination. Procedure for assignment of office responsibility in the Civil Service. Union Enactments. (6) Notice ofresignation of the Member ofthe House of Representatives or of a Chairman or Member of a committee of the House of Representatives shall be submitted to the Speaker of the House of Representatives. 130.(1) V/here any person holding any office established by this Constitution resigns ifhe has all the necessary qualifications and is in every respect eligible, he may be appointed or elected to hold such office in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution. (2) Where a person is removed from office or suspended from perfom1ing the functions of his office then the institution or the person removing or suspending him from office shall be obliged to inform the person concerned in writing that the institution or person has removed or suspended him from office. 131. For the purposes of interpreting the provisions of this Constitution in relation to the procedure of assignment to the service of the Revolutionary Government of Zanzibar, it is hereby declared that any person having power pursuant to this Constitution to appoint or nominate another person to hold a certain office has also the power to appoint or nominate a person to act in as Deputy or temporarily perfonn the functions of that office. 132.( 1) No law enacted by the Union Parliament shall apply to Zanzibar unless that law relates to Union affairs only and having complied with the provisions of the Union Constitution. (2) The enactment shall be submitted to the House of Representatives by the responsible Minister. 98 .. .. _---_ ...... _---The Constitution of Zanzibar (R.E.2G (3) Where subsidiary legislation is made in terms ofthe authority provided for in sub-articles (1) and (2) ofthis Article in accordance with the law shall only apply on compliance with the conditions in the parent Act as prescribed in this Article. 133.( 1) No tax of any kind shall be imposed save in accordance COD( . t to a for with a law enacted by the House of Representatives or pursuan taxal procedure lawfully prescribed and having the force oflaw by virtue of a law enacted by the House of Representatives . (2) The provisions contained in sub-article (l ) ofthis Article shall not preclude the Union Parliament from exercising its power.to impose tax of any kind in respect of Union matters in ac~ord~ce With the powers of the Union Parliament; taking into conslderat~on that Consultations between the Revolutionary Government of ZanzIbar and -the Government ofthe United Republic have been made and agreed to before enacting the relevant law. 134.(1) In this Constitution unless the context requires otherwise: "Revolutionary Council" includes the Cabinet. "Party" means a political party officially registered in accordance with the Political Parties Act 1992. "Judge" means a judge of the High Comt and includes Acting judge; "Oath" includes affinnation. "Oath of allegiance" means any oath of allegiance as prescribed by the House of Representatives. 99 Intcq lion. Act N of 20 S. 38.


===== PAGE 59 =====
I I I I i I i I ~ g I I I I [R.E. 2006J The Constitution of Zanzibar "Session of the House of Representatives 11 means a on session or part of the day ifthe House did not sit f< whole day which starts by a prayer and finis adjoununent until the following day or any future d~ "Employee of the Revolutionary Govenunent ofZanz means a person in service with or a person actinl position in the Revolutionary Govemment ofZall inclusive of Government parastatals. "meeting of the House of Representatives " means seri sessions of the House starting with the first session the time when the activities fixed for that meeting has finalized. "Financial year" means a period of 12 months ending 0 30th day of June of any year or any other day as she appointed by law as enacted by the Hous Representatives. "President" means the President of Zanzibar and Chair of the Revoluti onary Council. "Minister" means a member ofthe House of Rep resenta 1 and a Member of the RevolutionruyCouncil appoint< a position of Minister in the Revolutionary Governme Zanzibar. (2) Unless the context requires otherwise any power ve in the House of Representatives by this Constitution shall in tem establishing, or detailing anything shall be effected by legislation. 100


===== PAGE 60 =====
[RE. 20061 The Constitution of Zanzibar institution in the perfonnance if it functions it shall not mean that courts in exercise oftheir jurisdiction are excluded from inquiring whether that person of institution acted in accordance with this Constitution or any other law. (9) In this Constitution, where a mention is made of an amending Act, it is hereby declared that the relevant law includes the law as amended by that other law or which provides for continued use of that other law either with or without amendments or the law that introduces new conditions into another existing law. Repealing of the Zanzibar Constitution of 1979. Act No. 2 of 2002 S. 39. 134 A. The Constitution of Zanzibar of 1979 is hereby repealed. The name 135.(1) This Constitution may be cited as the Constitution of of the Constitution Zanzibar 1984. and Commcnccment date. (2) This Constitution shall come into operation on the 12th day ofJanuary, 1985. 102